Grove City
College
Bulletin
July 2022
Catalog Issued for
2022-2023
with calendars and
announcements of courses
Nondiscrimination policy
Grove City College is a private educational institution. It does not discriminate on the basis
of age, race, color, sex, marital status, disability, or national/ethnic origin in the
administration of its educational policies, admission policies, scholarship and loan
programs, athletic and other college-administrative programs.
Grove City College Bulletin
Volume 104
(USP 230-600)
U.S. Postal Service Statement of Ownership, Management and Circulation as required by
39 U.S.C. 3685. Grove City College Bulletin, owned and published annually (at no charge)
in July by Grove City College, 100 Campus Drive, Grove City, Mercer County, PA 16127.
Editor: Dr. John G. Inman, Vice President for Institutional Support and Initiatives, 100
Campus Drive, Grove City, PA 16127-2104. Managing Editor: Crystal Barr, Registrar, 100
Campus Drive, Grove City, PA 16127-2104. Total copies: 1,000 not paid or requested.
Copies mailed: 500. Free distribution: 250. Office use: 250.
Telephone: (724) 458-2000
www.gcc.edu

2 / 2022 - 2023 ACADEMIC CALENDAR

2022 - 2023 ACADEMIC CALENDAR

In keeping with the educational mission of Grove City College, the educational policies and procedures are continually being reviewed and
changed. This bulletin, which is to be used as an informational guide, contains regulations, facts, and requirements that were correct at the time
of publication. The Board of Trustees of the College reserves the right and authority to alter any or all of the statements contained herein, without
prior notice; however, a change in graduation requirements will not be made retroactive unless the change is to the advantage of the student.
Students are responsible for keeping informed of the official policies and meeting College requirements.

TABLE OF CONTENTS/ 3

TABLE OF CONTENTS
2022-23 ACADEMIC CALENDAR ... 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS .................... 3
HISTORY AND PURPOSE ...................5
The Vision, Mission, & Values of
Grove City College ..........................6
Goals and Objectives of Grove City
College.............................................7
Accreditation and Memberships ......8
Academic Schools ...........................8
The Campus .....................................9
The Institute for Faith & Freedom .12
The Center for Entrepreneurship +
Innovation ......................................13
Endowments ..................................13
ADMISSIONS ................................... 16
Admission Application Process .....16
Transfer Students ...........................20
No-Fee Technology Package .........21
EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID
........................................................... 22
Expenses (2022-2023) ...................22
Refunds ..........................................23
Financial Aid Program...................25
Scholarships...................................26
STUDENT LIFE............................... 39
General Rules and Regulations ......39
Health Services ..............................41
Orientation and Academic Advising
.......................................................42
Career Services ..............................42
Student Organizations....................43
Honor Societies..............................44
Confidential Information Policy ....47
Intellectual Property Policy for
Students .........................................47
ACADEMIC POLICIES ................... 49
General Requirements for
Graduation .....................................49
Transfer Credit ...............................53
Withdrawals ...................................55
Readmission ..................................55
Class Standing ...............................55
Academic Standing ........................56
Attendance Expectations for
Students .........................................56
Academic Integrity ........................60

Information Technology................ 62
GENERAL EDUCATION AND
DEGREE PROGRAMS .................... 63
General Education Requirements .. 63
Chapel Attendance Requirement ... 70
Degree Programs ........................... 71
DEPARTMENTS AND COURSES OF
INSTRUCTION ................................ 82
Academic Schools ......................... 82
Accounting and Finance ................ 83
Applied Science and Engineering . 90
Biblical and Religious Studies and
Philosophy..................................... 94
Biology ........................................ 108
Chemistry .................................... 118
Communication and Visual Arts . 126
Computer Science ....................... 137
Economics ................................... 147
Education .................................... 151
Electrical and Computer Engineering
.................................................... 171
English ........................................ 182
Entrepreneurship ......................... 195
Exercise Science ......................... 204
History......................................... 213
Management and Marketing........ 219
Mathematics and Statistics .......... 236
Mechanical Engineering.............. 244
Modern Languages ...................... 255
Music........................................... 267
Charles Jr. and Betty Johnson School
of Nursing ................................... 283
Physics ........................................ 285
Political Science .......................... 293
Psychology, Social Work, and
Sociology .................................... 298
Directories (2022-2023) .................. 311
Board of Trustees ........................ 311
Officers of the College ................ 313
Administration ............................ 313
Faculty Administration................ 314
Full-Time Faculty........................ 315
Adjunct Faculty ........................... 325
Additional Instructional Faculty.. 325
Retired Administration ................ 329
Retired Faculty ............................ 330

4 / TABLE OF CONTENTS

HISTORY AND PURPOSE/ 5

HISTORY AND PURPOSE
When Grove City College was chartered, a broad, Christian-based cultural consensus
prevailed in America. By charter, the doors of the College were open to qualified students
"without regard to religious test or belief." The founders of Grove City College, consciously
avoiding narrow sectarianism, held a vision of Christian society transcending denomination,
creeds, and confessions. They were committed to the advancement of free enterprise, civil
and religious liberty, representative government, arts and letters, and science and
technology. Believing that the fruits of civilization would be destroyed if religious and
ethical roots were allowed to wither, the founders intended that the claims of Christ as God
and Savior and of inspired Scripture be presented to all. They hoped that through its program
of intellectual, moral, and spiritual education, Grove City College would produce young
leaders, whatever their creed or confession, capable of pushing civilization forward on every
frontier.
During the founding days of the College, Joseph Newton Pew said to Dr. Isaac C.
Ketler, "Make the College healthful, for that is essential. Make it beautiful, for that is an
education." In later years, J. Howard Pew, for nearly sixty years one of the guiding spirits
in building Grove City College, stated that the College's "prime responsibility is to inculcate
in the minds and hearts of youth those Christian, moral, and ethical principles without which
our country cannot long endure." These principles have been part of the dynamic motivation
of Grove City College. Founded in 1876, the school for many years was located near the
center of Grove City on what is now known as the Lower Campus. In 1929, a farm across
Wolf Creek from the old downtown campus was purchased, and the effort was begun to
move the school from its gracious but limited area within the heart of Grove City, up onto
the hill across Wolf Creek. Today, Grove City College has one of the most beautiful
campuses in the country.
Grove City is an independent Christian college of liberal arts, sciences, and preprofessional programs. It is governed by a Board of Trustees composed of private citizens
who make all policies for the school.
Those who are responsible for Grove City College believe that the progress and security
of America are made possible and maintained by a society that: (1) recognizes its obligation
to its religious heritage; (2) supports free political institutions; (3) encourages a free society;
and (4) promotes an educational system which seeks to perpetuate these religious,
intellectual, political, and economic ideals. The College gives its support to worthy efforts
to improve the American way of life with its traditional rights and freedoms. It stresses not
only the rights of the individual but also the individual's responsibilities. It recognizes its
own responsibility to strengthen and perpetuate our free society. Consistent with Christian
principles, Grove City College does not discriminate on the basis of age, race, color, sex,
marital status, disability, or national or ethnic origin.
From its founding days the College has endeavored to give young people the best in
liberal, scientific, and pre-professional education at the lowest possible cost and, in keeping
with this historic policy, maintains one of the lowest tuitions of any independent, highquality college. It has always been coeducational. Current enrollment is limited to
approximately 2,500 students. It is thoroughly Christian and evangelical in character.
The College equips its students with tools that will enable them to continue their
education throughout their lives. It holds up to them Christian principles to assist in their
spiritual and emotional development and to guide them in their service to society. It helps
them to see what makes life worth living. It teaches them basic disciplines that will be of
great value in professional specialization at a university or in their careers after graduation.

6 / HISTORY AND PURPOSE

The College aims to maintain a cordial and cooperative relationship between faculty
and students. Staff members are chosen both for their competence and personal qualities.
However, the College’s mission necessitates the selection of a faculty who are professing
Christians, experts in their chosen fields of learning, and thoroughly loyal to the purposes
of the College. Faculty participation in student affairs, with a wide range of responsibility
placed in the hands of the students themselves, characterizes the extracurricular program at
Grove City. Counseling concerning academic and personal affairs is informal and effective.
Many student enterprises are conducted under the supervision of joint faculty and student
committees.
Realization of College ideals depends upon the complete cooperation of every member
of the College community in:
• Searching courageously, persistently and reverently for truth
• Respecting the individuality of each person
• Seeking a Christian perspective in all fields of learning
• Honoring College regulations and policies
• Enabling the greatest possible mental, spiritual and physical development of every
campus citizen
In brief, Grove City College aims to be a Christian college of liberal arts and sciences.
It seeks to help its students to grow as persons, to achieve an integrated overview of reality,
and to master at least one major discipline of knowledge. Its religious program, evangelical
in its orientation, offers ample opportunity for young people to fellowship with Christian
leaders who are dedicated to helping youths to understand the application of Christian
principles to everyday life. Chapel services and convocation programs are designed to
stimulate the campus community to think creatively and critically about ultimate issues in
the light of the Word of God. Grove City College is an undenominational, but evangelical
Christian college. The College aims to give young people the best in the liberal arts and
sciences in a wholesome Christian environment.
Grove City College remains true to the vision of its founders. Rejecting relativism and
secularism, it fosters intellectual, moral, spiritual, and social development consistent with a
commitment to Christian truth, morals, and freedom. Rather than political, ideological, or
philosophical agendas, objective truth continues as the goal of liberal learning. The core of
the curriculum, particularly in the humanities, consists of books, thinkers, and ideas proven
across the ages to be of value in the quest for knowledge. Intellectual inquiry remains open
to the questions religion raises and affirms the answers Christianity offers. The ethical
absolutes of the Ten Commandments and Christ's moral teachings guide the effort to
develop intellect and character in the classroom, chapel, and co-curricular activities. And
while many points of view are examined, the College unapologetically advocates
preservation of America's religious, political, and economic heritage of individual freedom
and responsibility.

The Vision, Mission, & Values of Grove City College
Vision
Grove City College strives to be a highly distinctive and comprehensive Christian
liberal arts college of extraordinary value. Grounded in permanent ideas and conservative
values and committed to the foundations of free society, we develop leaders of the highest
proficiency, purpose, and principles ready to advance the common good.
Mission
Grove City College equips students to pursue their unique callings through a Christcentered, academically excellent, and affordable learning and living experience.

HISTORY AND PURPOSE/ 7

The stated values of the College are as follows:
Faithfulness
By God’s grace, we remain committed to the same Christian faith embraced by the
College’s founders and to seek, teach, and apply biblical truth in all that we do. While we
continuously adapt our efforts in relation to the realities and challenges of this world, we
serve a God who is the same yesterday, today, and tomorrow.
Excellence
In everything we do, from classrooms to residence halls, from performance stages to
sports venues, we are devoted wholeheartedly to the highest standards of excellence.
“…[D]o all to the glory of God” (1 Cor. 10:31).
Community
We foster life-long community engagement through a dynamic and welcoming
campus experience marked by fellowship, service, hospitality, and abiding respect for others
as God’s image-bearers.
Stewardship
We honor the financial support and commitment of families, alumni, and friends of
the College by managing our resources wisely, especially in maintaining affordability and
the beauty of the campus, as we secure the long-term sustainability of the College.
Independence
In pursuit of our mission, we value and safeguard our institutional autonomy as a
blessing of America’s heritage of freedom.

Goals and Objectives of Grove City College
In pursuit of its mission, Grove City College seeks to achieve the following goals:
• To provide an excellent education in a college which seeks to be thoroughly
Christian and evangelical in character.
• To seek a Christian perspective of life which integrates all fields of learning by
communicating the significance of the Word of God for all of life in all disciplines.
• To keep the door of educational opportunity open to all by maintaining low charges,
thus minimizing financial burdens on families.
In pursuit of its mission, Grove City College seeks to achieve the following objectives:
• Promote academic development - Pursue and impart knowledge with conviction,
grounded in Christian principles, that objective truth is the goal of intellectual
inquiry. Offer a curriculum that is carefully reviewed and revised, avoiding
educational philosophies that deny the possibility of truth or meaning, assert the
relativity of values, or emphasize contemporary perspectives to the neglect of what
has proved itself across the ages to be of value for human life. By example, and by
the content of what is taught, foster Christian values, general and specialized
knowledge, and commitment of lifelong learning required for successful living in
our ever-changing society.
• Promote spiritual and moral development - Increase understanding of Christian
precepts within the context of Christian fellowship and worship in order to help
develop leadership abilities and application of Christian truth. Prepare students for
life in an increasingly diverse society and interrelated global community by
promoting a Christian vision of humanity and community that transcends cultural
differences. Promote a sense of personal responsibility and love of freedom.

8 / HISTORY AND PURPOSE

•

•
•

•

Promote social and emotional development - Provide opportunities for students to
interact with faculty, staff and peers. Encourage students to take responsible
leadership roles in student activities. Make available effective counseling and
counseling referrals for personal, career, and academic concerns.
Promote physical development - Provide intramural, intercollegiate, and personal
recreational opportunities for men and women, and encourage individuals to engage
in a healthy lifestyle that will promote lifelong fitness and wellness.
Promote a sense of responsibility to larger community and society - Provide
academic, spiritual, social, and cultural services to the broader community. Support
traditional rights, freedoms, and responsibilities. Hold open the door of equal
educational and employment opportunities by actively encouraging applications
from qualified students and staff of all races, ethnicity, gender, and class.
Model responsible administration - Under the oversight and direction of trustees
and through careful stewardship of resources: engage a qualified faculty; support a
quality academic program; provide beautiful, efficient facilities; maintain full
enrollment; continue a debt-free, independent status; and focus and coordinate all
activities and operations so that the College will achieve its goals and objectives.

Accreditation and Memberships
Grove City College is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher
Education,1007 North Orange Street, 4th Floor, MB#166, Wilmington, Delaware 19801.
The Middle States Commission on Higher Education (www.msche.org) is an institutional
accrediting agency recognized by the U.S. Secretary of Education and the Council for
Higher Accreditation.
By the authority of the Pennsylvania Department of Education
(www.education.pa.gov), the College has the right to award degrees and to recommend
candidates for elementary, middle level, secondary, K-12, and special education school
certifications. Undergraduate curricula in electrical and mechanical engineering have been
accredited since 1991 and the Bachelor of Science in Computer Science major since 2013
by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, (www.abet.org). The
undergraduate curriculum in exercise science has been accredited since 2014 by the
Committee on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (www.caahep.org).
Undergraduate curricula in accounting, entrepreneurship, finance, international business,
management, and marketing have been accredited since 2014 by the Accreditation Council
for Business Schools and Programs (www.acbsp.org). Grove City College’s Bachelor of
Science in Social Work program is accredited through the Council on Social Work
Education (CSWE; www.cswe.org). The College’s Bachelor of Science in Nursing
Program is accredited by the Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing (ACEN;
www.acenursing.org).
The College is also an institutional member of the American Association of Colleges
for Teacher Education, the National Association of Colleges and Employers, the
Association of Independent Colleges and Universities of Pennsylvania, and many other
associations. Grove City College has been an institutional participant in the National
Council for State Authorization Reciprocity Agreements (NC-SARA) for the delivery of
interstate postsecondary distance-education courses and programs since January 2019.

Academic Schools
Grove City College divides its academic programs into three schools - the School of
Arts and Letters and the School of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics. These two

HISTORY AND PURPOSE/ 9

schools encompass all departments of instruction and provide students with a choice of
numerous majors, minors, certifications, and pre-professional concentrations.
The Alva J. Calderwood School of Arts and Letters was dedicated in 2002 in honor of
Dr. Alva J. Calderwood, a professor for 53 years and Dean of the College for 35 years. Dr.
Calderwood graduated from Grove City College in 1896, and after pursuing graduate
studies at Harvard University, he returned to Grove City College to spend the remainder of
his life teaching and administering. He was known as an accomplished professor and
academic dean who took a personal interest in the lives of everyone. His example lives on
as a guiding light today for faculty, students and administration. The Alva J. Calderwood
School of Arts and Letters is comprised of the Departments of; Biblical and Religious
Studies and Philosophy; Communication and Visual Arts; Education; English; History;
Modern Languages; Music; Political Science; and Psychology, Social Work and Sociology.
The Albert A. Hopeman, Jr. School of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics was
dedicated in 1997 in honor of Albert A. Hopeman, Jr., who served for 44 years on the Grove
City College Board of Trustees and as President of the Board from 1972 until his death in
1998. Mr. Hopeman left a deep imprint on the history and the future of Grove City College
and is remembered for his loving attention to the College and its mission. He was awarded
an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from the College in 1961. The Albert A. Hopeman, Jr.
School of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics is comprised of the Departments of
Biology; Chemistry; Computer Science; Electrical and Computer Engineering; Exercise
Science; Mathematics; Mechanical Engineering; Physics; and the Charles Jr. and Betty
Johnson School of Nursing.
The School of Business was launched in 2022 and comprises the Departments of
Accounting and Finance; Economics; Entrepreneurship; and Management and Marketing.
These departments offer 15 majors, including several graduate programs.

The Campus
Grove City College is located approximately sixty miles north of Pittsburgh in Grove
City, Pennsylvania, a town with a population of eight thousand. Grove City is less than five
miles from the intersection of U.S. Interstates 80 and 79, principal east/west and north/south
routes. It is an hour and fifteen minutes’ drive from the Pittsburgh International Airport and
about ten minutes’ drive from a 140-store retail outlet mall. The town of Grove City,
organized as a borough, has diversified industries, a fine hospital, and a strong church
community that takes great pride in its College.
The campus of Grove City College comprises over 180 beautifully landscaped acres,
divided into two sections by Wolf Creek – Lower and Upper Campus. These two areas are
connected by Rainbow Bridge, a stone arch footbridge, and by city streets. The Lower
Campus, located on the edge of the business district of Grove City, is the site of the Robert
E. Thorn Field for football and track; the Donald L. McMillan ’32 MD Press Box facility;
Phillips Field House; Colonial Hall Apartments; Carnegie Alumni Center; tennis courts; and
a softball field. The Upper Campus is the site of administrative buildings; classroom,
technology, and laboratory facilities; residence halls; health center; indoor athletic facilities
and playing fields and outdoor playing fields; library; chapel; and fine arts center.

Educational Resources
Staley Hall of Arts and Letters is a state-of-the-art teaching facility that features a lecture
hall; 40 classrooms (including multimedia-equipped rooms and tiered “case study” rooms);
80 faculty offices; the Early Education Center and Hamilton Curriculum Library. Named in
honor of Richard Staley ’62, the building houses the Alva J. Calderwood School of Arts and
Letters and the School of Business.

10 / HISTORY AND PURPOSE

Hoyt Hall, named for Dr. Creig S. Hoyt who served for many years as Chair of the
Department of Chemistry and Dean of the College, contains classrooms and modern
laboratory facilities for ABET-accredited programs in electrical and mechanical
engineering.
Rockwell Hall of Science, which houses the Department of Physics, the Department of
Exercise Science and some laboratories for the Departments of Biology and Chemistry, has
been extensively renovated with modern teaching laboratories and multimedia classrooms.
Major instrumentation includes an Automated DNA Sequencer, and Real Time Quantitative
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Thermocycler. Facilities also exist to support
computational physics and chemistry, database searching/serving, and molecular
visualization.
STEM Hall, completed in fall 2013, is home to the Departments of Chemistry, Biology
and Computer Science. The design of the building encourages collaboration among the
faculty and students, with myriad common areas for group work and glass-walled
laboratories.
Henry Buhl Library provides services and collections to meet the needs of students and
faculty. The Library maintains strong academic book collections of current and
retrospective primary and secondary works, e-books, full-text online reference materials
and journals, videos, music, and audiobooks. Its web page offers research guides by major
and by course, links to scholarly sites, and help with citing sources. The web page and all
e-resources are accessible from any network connection on campus and through the Global
Protect Network from off-campus. Interlibrary loans of books and funded document
delivery of articles are available to all students and faculty. Book stacks are open for
browsing. Network access, both wired and wireless, is available throughout the building.
Individual and group study rooms are available through an online reservation system.
Learning Commons study rooms are equipped with Microsoft Surface Hubs. The Library
also houses the Academic Resource Center (ARC).
When school is in session, the Library is open every day, totaling more than 100 hours
each week, with the reference desk staffed daily. Librarians provide research assistance
from the reference desk during posted hours, through classroom visits, and small-group
drop-in sessions. E-mail requests for help are accepted and students may make appointments
for research consultation. A campus café with an outdoor patio is also available for student
use.
Hamilton Curriculum Library is housed in the Hall of Arts and Letters and is designed
for elementary and secondary education majors, with special emphasis on supporting field
experiences and student teaching.
The J. Howard Pew Fine Arts Center, opened in 1976, is a memorial to Mr. J. Howard
Pew, distinguished alumnus and Trustee of the College for nearly sixty years and President
of the Board of Trustees from 1931-1971. This complex contains the Pew Memorial Room
(housing a magnificent art collection donated to the College by Mr. Pew), a large modern
auditorium, a small theater, art and music studios, rehearsal halls, practice rooms,
classrooms, faculty offices, and exhibition halls. An addition completed in October 2002
contains additional classrooms, practice rooms, and a 188-seat recital hall.
The Weir C. Ketler Technological Learning Center, named for President Emeritus
Ketler, who served his alma mater from 1916 to 1956, is constructed mostly underground,
adjacent to the Henry Buhl Library, and houses state-of-the-art equipment for computerassisted instruction. The 20,000 square-foot building contains touch-down points,
computers for walk-up access, a lecture hall, Print Production Services.

HISTORY AND PURPOSE/ 11

Residence Facilities
The residence halls of Grove City College are attractive and comfortable. An ongoing
program of renovation and modernization maintains these facilities in first class condition.
Alumni Hall is located on the second floor of the Physical Learning Center and houses
upperclassmen.
Colonial Hall, located on Lower Campus, is comprised of apartments for senior-level
students; one wing of the hall is for women, the other for men.
Helen Harker Hall, named for the wife of the fourth president of the College, houses
women.
Hicks Hall, named for College Trustee Lewis W. Hicks, houses men and contains a
500-seat dining facility.
Hopeman Hall, named for College Trustee Bertram C. Hopeman, houses men.
Isaac C. Ketler Hall, built as a memorial to the founder of the College, houses men and
contains a recreation lounge on the ground floor that is open to all students.
Larry House honors former Trustee R. Heath Larry ’34, an icon of Pittsburgh industry,
and his wife, Eleanor (Ketler ’37) Larry, granddaughter of College founder Isaac Ketler and
daughter of College President Dr. Weir Ketler, Class of 1908.
Lascell House honors David M. Lascell, Esq., chief counsel to the College in its
landmark Supreme Court case of 1984, Grove City College vs. T.H. Bell, Secretary of
Education.
Lincoln Hall, named for the 16th president of the United States, Abraham Lincoln,
houses men. It was a gift from the J. Howard Pew (Class of 1900) family.
Mary Anderson Pew Hall, named for the wife of the first president of the Board of
Trustees, houses women and contains a 450-seat dining room and a 145-seat special-event
dining room.
Mary Ethel Pew Hall, named for a long-time member of the Board of Trustees and
benefactor of the College, houses women.
Memorial Hall was built as a memorial to Joseph Newton Pew, first president of the
Board of Trustees, and houses men.
Stewart House is named in honor of successful local businessman and Trustee William
C. Stewart ’61 and his wife, Gay, for their generosity and contributions of time, talent and
treasure.
Administration and Student Support Buildings
Breen Student Union is named in honor of current Board of Trustees Chairman, Edward
D. Breen, and his wife, Lynn, generous benefactors of the College and members of the class
of 1978. The Breen Student Union houses the Office of Student Life and Learning,
bookstore, mailroom, and commuter lounge. It also houses the campus snack bar, called the
Gedunk, which contains a wood fire pizza oven, grill stations, and a Bistro. Private meeting
and banquet rooms are also available and may be reserved for special occasions. The Breen
Student Union is open 24 hours a day during the academic year.
Carnegie Alumni Center, originally constructed as a library for the College and
community by its benefactor Andrew Carnegie, houses offices for the alumni, institutional
advancement, and communications departments.
Crawford Hall is the administrative center of the College. It was made possible by a
gift from Harry J. Crawford, who served as a member of the Board of Trustees for many
years. In addition to offices, it contains an auditorium and a social room for student and
faculty gatherings.
Samuel P. Harbison Memorial Chapel is the center of the religious life of the campus.
It provides an inspiring place of worship and a place for quiet meditation. It was built by the
sons of Trustee Samuel P. Harbison as a memorial to their father, who for many years served

12 / HISTORY AND PURPOSE

the College as a trustee. The beauty of the interior is enhanced by hand carved woodwork
and jewel-like stained glass windows. The organ, a four manual Kimball, is a memorial to
Frances St. Leger Babcock, wife of F. R. Babcock, a former president of the Board of
Trustees. The east and west transepts of the chapel were gifts respectively of Miss Ethel
Pew, a trustee of the College, and the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.).
Rathburn Hall functions as the hub for campus ministry and student community
outreach groups, and is available for use by other student groups, as well. Named in honor
of Board of Trustees Chair Emeritus David ’79, Mark ’08, Tyler ’18, and Jayne Rathburn,
the facility contains offices for the Chapel staff, seminar rooms, and a work room for student
ministry groups. The building provides a venue for campus group meetings and large group
receptions in the Morledge Great Room, as well as a comfortable lounge area for Bible study
and small groups. While Christian ministry at Grove City College takes place on every part
of the campus, this building represents the College’s commitment to maintaining an
authentically Christian environment.
Zerbe Health Center provides outpatient health care by physicians who make weekday
visits and by staff nurses. Beds are available for non-overnight, in-patient care of students
with minor ailments. Zerbe also houses the college’s Counseling Center. For more
information, see ‘Health Services’ in the Student Life section of the Bulletin.

Physical Education Facilities
The Physical Learning Center features an arena, an intramural room, two swimming
pools, an eight-lane bowling alley, and other recreational facilities. The Career Services
Office, which contains staff offices, a library, and professional interviewing rooms for oncampus recruiters, is also located in this building. The Arena, which has a seating capacity
of 1,800, is used for intercollegiate and intramural basketball, volleyball, club sports,
recreation, and special events. The Intramural Room is equipped with four indoor tennis
courts, four volleyball courts, four basketball courts, four badminton courts, a conditioning
track, and two pits for pole vault and triple and long jump. The room also provides an ideal
location for dances and other social events. Specific areas for various activities include the
Hall of Fame room; Heritage Hall; audio-visual classroom; two fitness center rooms
equipped with aerobic, Cybex and free-weight equipment; two aerobic/dance studios; and
five racquetball and handball courts. The building also houses an athletic training room,
athletic laundry room and five men’s and women’s locker rooms.
The College has three outdoor playing-field areas. On Lower Campus, an all-weather
eight-lane 400-meter track, complete with a steeplechase water pit, surrounds Robert E.
Thorn field. The football field, featuring artificial turf, lights and a seating capacity of 3,500,
forms a natural amphitheater bounded on the northwest by a brick and concrete stadium.
Adjacent to Thorn Field are the jumping and throwing facilities for field events. Phillips
Field House provides locker, training, and coaches’ rooms for Thorn Field. The WaltersZbell Tennis Courts adjoin this facility. Also on Lower Campus is the women's softball
field, which is located on Pine Street. On Upper Campus, there is Don Lyle Field for varsity
soccer and Jack Behringer Field for varsity baseball. Seven touch-football fields, four
softball fields for intramural sports, three multi-purpose intramural fields, and the marching
band practice area are located across the street on Madison Avenue behind the Physical
Learning Center.

The Institute for Faith & Freedom
The Institute for Faith & Freedom is a Grove City College think tank that focuses on
public policy and social issues from the perspectives of Christian faith and individual
freedom. The Institute generates faculty research, opinion editorials, and media interviews,
and holds at least one major conference each year for which students can register and earn

HISTORY AND PURPOSE/ 13

academic credit. The Institute for Faith & Freedom Endowment exists for the benefit of the
Institute’s student fellows.

The Center for Entrepreneurship + Innovation
The Center for Entrepreneurship + Innovation (E+I) at Grove City College provides
experiential learning activities, programs, competitions, and events centered on
entrepreneurship and innovation for the entire student body, regardless of major. The
concepts of entrepreneurship and innovation don’t just apply when one is starting a
business, as these are mindsets and skillsets that prepare our students to thrive and stand
out in any career path. Through E+I programming, students are equipped and empowered
to go out into the world and make a true difference for the common good, no matter how
and where they are called to serve. More information about E+I events, programs, and
competitions can be found by visiting www.gccentrepreneurship.com.

Endowments
The endowment resources of the College have been made possible by the generous
gifts of individuals and foundations. Endowments benefiting the College include the
following special funds:
The William H. Burchfield Fund. Established in 1995, this trust fund is used to support
the College’s renewal and replacement program for campus buildings.
The Institute for Faith and Freedom Endowment. Established in 2010, this fund is used
to support the annual programs of the Institute.
Harry J. Crawford Trust Fund. Established through a gift by Harry J. Crawford, a
former trustee of the College, this fund is used for the maintenance of Crawford Hall.
Clark G. Drake Library Fund Memorial. This fund, in memory of the late Clark G.
Drake, is used for library purposes.
The Entrepreneurship Center Endowment. Established by an anonymous donor, this
fund is used to support the operations of The Center for Entrepreneurship + Innovation at
Grove City College.
Elizabeth Harbison Fund. Miss Martha Harbison, a former student, created a fund for
the benefit of the Library, as a memorial to her mother Mrs. Elizabeth Harbison.
Samuel P. Harbison Fund. Established by the Harbison estate and the Board of
Christian Education as a memorial to Samuel Pollock Harbison, an early member of the
Board of Trustees, this fund is used to support the Biblical & Religious Studies and
Philosophy Department.
H. D. Hough, Jr. Library Fund. Established by H. D. Hough in memory of H. D.
Hough, Jr., this fund is used to purchase books for the library.
Howard-Nelson Fund. Established by Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Nelson in memory of their
parents, the income from this fund is used for the benefit of the Departments of Modern
Language and English.
The Howell-Jenkins Fund. Established by Mrs. Josephine Stiefel Jenkins in memory of
her husband, the income from this fund is used for general purposes.
Ellen Bell Ketler Fund. Established by the family of the late Ellen Bell Ketler, the
income of this fund is used for the benefit of students, either as scholarships, student awards,
or for books, works of art or other items, which will add to the cultural resources of the
College.
William Richard Ketler Fund. Established by his parents, Weir C. and Ellen B. Ketler,
the income from this fund is used for improvements to the Student Union, for scholarship
grants, for the purchase of books, or for the purchase of works of artistic, historical or
cultural value.

14 / HISTORY AND PURPOSE

The Kreutner Library Book Purchase Endowment. Established in 1998 by James and
Betty Kreutner, this fund is used for the purchase of library books in English, English
Literature or Journalism.
Albert C. Lamb Fund. Established by Miss Mary C. Lamb, this fund is used for books
for the Biblical & Religious Studies and Philosophy Department.
Joanne F. McVay & William J. McVay Conservative Student Fellowship Endowment.
Established by Drs. Joanne and William McVay, this fund is used to provide assistance to
fellows pursuing research of and education in conservative policy.
The Samuel M. Nelson & Helen L. Nelson Memorial Trust. Established by Mr. & Mrs.
Samuel M. Nelson, the income of this fund is used to support full professor salaries in the
Liberal Arts program.
Miriam (Shellito’52) Parker and Royal Parker’52 Organ Recital Endowment. The fund
was established by the generosity of the family of Miriam and Royal Parker.
The Phillips Interdisciplinary Endowment Fund. Established in June 2016 by Michael
and Marlene Phillips to encourage students to minor and participate in interdisciplinary
activities. Eligible students may apply for funding to participate in special programs or
projects, attend conferences, or engage in research opportunities.
Reed Fund. Established by Mr. E. B. Reed, this fund is used for books for the
Department of Management and Marketing.
The Richard S. Robinson, Sr. Presidential Fund for Student Innovation. Established by
Richard S. Robinson, Sr. in December 2015. The Fund is available for the discretionary use
by the President of the College for the following: student programming in the Chapel and
campus ministries; motivational speakers and competitions for The Center for
Entrepreneurship + Innovation at Grove City College and the Department of Management
and Marketing; and student research opportunities, internships and equipment in Science,
Engineering and Mathematics.
The Richard G. Staley ’62 Visionary Entrepreneurship Speaker Series. This
endowment shall provide assistance to The Center for Entrepreneurship + Innovation at
Grove City College to obtain speakers so that the students, alumni, and the community can
learn from the experience of real-world entrepreneurs and innovators.
Stiefel-Jenkins Fund. Established by Josephine Stiefel Jenkins, this fund is used to
support the study of economics.
The Storey Fund. Established in 1981 by Dr. James Storey, this fund is used to support
the Chemistry Department.
The Bob Thorn Fund for Annual Giving. This endowment, established through the
estate of Robert E. Thorn, is directed for use in the Annual Giving Fund.
The Wolverine Innovation Fund. Established in 2018 by Dr. Mark E. Thompson, MD,
this fund is used to support the Center for Entrepreneurship + Innovation at Grove City
College.
The Clever Campus Beautification Endowment. Established by Terrance R. Clever ‘75,
this fund is used to support the preservation and beautification of the Grove City College
campus through maintenance of its grounds and ongoing landscape planning.
The Helen & Ellison Davison Research Endowment. Established by Helen and Ellison
Davison, this fund is used to support research within the Albert A. Hopeman, Jr. School of
Science, Engineering, and Mathematics.
In addition to the above special funds, the following funds have been endowed to
support the general operations of the College:
Clifford Bowden Fund
James M. Dugan Fund
General Endowment Fund
Lewis Hicks Endowment Fund

HISTORY AND PURPOSE/ 15

Ketler Foundation Fund
Gen. and Mrs. Richard Mellon Fund
Clark T. and Samantha E. Pease Endowment Fund
S. T. Ramage Fund
Redick and Brandon Endowment Fund
Eva Rutledge Fund
Beatty B. Williams Fund

Fall 2021
Graduate
Seniors
Juniors
Sophomores
Freshmen
Unclassified
Totals

Opening Enrollment
Men
Women
7
4
298
264
244
202
267
252
313
332
67
67
1,196
1,121

Total
11
562
446
519
645
134
2,317

16 / ADMISSIONS

ADMISSIONS
Grove City College continues to believe that its objectives can be best realized by
maintaining its character as a Christian college of liberal arts and sciences. The requirements
for admission are designed to enable the College to select those students who will both
contribute to and benefit from this type of college community. Prospective students seeking
an education that will prepare them to take their rightful place in a free society and willing
to accept the responsibilities and rights of campus citizenship are welcome at Grove City
College regardless of age, race, color, sex, marital status, disability, or national or ethnic
origin.
Prospective students are invited to seek any additional information they may desire
from the Admissions or Financial Aid Offices.

Admission Application Process
Grove City College is intentional about shaping our student body through a thoughtful,
deadline-driven selection process. Unlike rolling decision schools that provide students with
quick decisions and discounts often disguised as scholarships, Grove City crafts every
incoming class with a focus on application quality and holistic fit — demonstrating genuine
interest in the student and a desire to reward excellence through transparently funded
scholarships.
Our intentional review process includes consideration of the content and rigor of your
academic coursework, grades, class rank (if applicable), standardized test scores, academic
and spiritual/character recommendations, extracurricular involvement, leadership and
service, thoughtful response to an essay prompt, and an optional (but highly recommended)
interview with an admissions counselor. There are no absolute minimum standards for
grades, class rank, or test scores, and your personal accomplishments and potential for
success are considered in the selective admissions process.

Applications
To access our application for admission and view instructions,
visit www.gcc.edu/howtoapply. The online application alone can and should be submitted
as soon as possible so that we can learn about your interests, connect you with faculty and
others on campus, and begin advocating for your scholarship and admission consideration.
If you would prefer to submit a paper application, email admissions@gcc.edu to request
one.
All supporting documents must be submitted by your selected admissions application
deadline. Please note that once the application has been submitted, it becomes the property
of the College. Letters of recommendation; transcript(s); and SAT, ACT, or CLT (Classic
Learning Test) scores will not be returned or photocopied.
Recommended Coursework
Graduation from and recommendation by an approved secondary school is
required. Homeschooled students, please refer to the section titled ‘Homeschooling
Requirements’ for additional details. An academic, college preparatory curriculum is highly
recommended, including:
• 4 years of English
• 3 years of social science
• 3 years of science
• 2 years of history (This may overlap with social science.)

ADMISSIONS/ 17

•
•

3 years of math (The study of mathematics up through calculus is required and/or
recommended for entrance into the programs of mathematics, science, and
engineering.)
Foreign language: Students pursuing a Bachelor of Arts major or a non-science
Bachelor of Science major will be required to complete a full year of a foreign
language at the intermediate level at Grove City College, unless they meet one of
the following criteria:
o 3 years of the same modern, widely spoken foreign language during high
school, such as Chinese, French, German, or Spanish, with an average grade
of “B” or higher, or
o 2 to 3 years of the same classical written language during high school, such
as Latin, New Testament Greek, or Biblical Hebrew with an average grade
of “B” or higher, which will partially fulfill the foreign language
requirement. Students must complete two additional courses as outlined in
the “General Education and Degree Programs” section under the “Foreign
Language” guidelines.

Grade Point Average
When assessing grade point average, consideration is also given to class rank and to
the strength and frequency of Honors, Advanced Placement, and International
Baccalaureate coursework in a student’s curriculum. Consistently strong academic
performance throughout a candidate’s four-year high school record is an important
component of the evaluation process.
Standardized Test Scores
Grove City College is test-optional, however, if you have taken or are scheduled to
take an SAT, ACT, or CLT test, we encourage you to submit your test scores for optimal
admission and scholarship consideration. We highly recommend that prospective computer
science and mechanical engineering majors submit standardized test scores. We do require
test scores for international students to demonstrate subject proficiency. Grove City College
has always reviewed applicants holistically, considering academic abilities, extracurricular
and leadership experiences, and Christian values and character.
You may send your SAT, ACT, or CLT scores to Grove City College via email, fax,
or mail or include them in your official high school transcript. SAT and ACT scores may
be sent directly to Grove City College from the testing center at your request. If you take
the SAT, ACT, or CLT more than once, the College will record the highest subscores achieved and will continue to consider your best sub-scores, even if from different
sittings; therefore, it is to your advantage to send all test scores from each test date. For the
SAT, Grove City College combines only the Critical Reading and the Math sub-scores for
a total score, with the highest possible score being 1600.
The College accepts standardized test scores from freshman and transfer applicants
(including international students) who are attending high school in the United States,
freshman and transfer applicants who attend overseas American or international schools,
and international freshman and transfer applicants who are able to take the SAT in their
country. For international applicants, TOEFL and IELTS scores are also accepted. The
minimum TOEFL score considered is 550 paper-based, 213 computer-based, or 79-80
internet-based. The minimum IELTS score considered is 6.5.
Personal Interview (Optional, Highly Recommended)
The interview plays a significant role in our holistic review process and is highly
recommended for admission and scholarship consideration. As a guided, one-on-one

18 / ADMISSIONS

conversation with an admissions counselor, the interview is a one-time opportunity for
students to share their story, learn more about the College, and get their questions answered.
Although the interview is not required as part of the application for admission, we
recommend it for high school seniors (or students who are ready to interview by the spring
of their junior year).
Students must interview prior to their selected admissions application deadline: Nov. 1
(Early Decision I), Dec. 1 (Early Decision II), Jan. 20 (Regular Decision I), or March 20
(Regular Decision II).
We offer interviews Monday through Friday throughout the year as well as on select
Saturdays. Visit www.gcc.edu/visit to view available dates and schedule.

Academic and Spiritual/Character Recommendation Letters
All freshman applicants should submit one academic letter of recommendation from
a teacher or guidance counselor and one spiritual/character letter of recommendation from
a pastor, youth pastor, or someone who can speak to the applicant’s spiritual life and
character. Additional letters may be submitted, although the number of recommendations
received beyond the two required does not factor into the decision-making
process. Recommendation letters are not required to follow a specific form or template and
may be emailed to admissions@gcc.edu or faxed to (724) 458-3395.
Music Auditions
All applicants for the Bachelor of Music degree must fulfill the audition
requirement prior to their selected admissions application deadline Nov. 1 (Early Decision
I), Dec. 1 (Early Decision II), Jan. 20 (Regular Decision I), or March 20 (Regular Decision
II) application submission deadline. To learn more about the audition process and to
schedule an audition, visit www.gcc.edu/applymusic.
Early Decision
If you are prepared to make a binding commitment to Grove City College as your firstchoice school, we encourage you to apply for the Early Decision I deadline (Nov. 1) or the
Early Decision II deadline (Dec. 1). You should not apply for Early Decision unless you
fully expect to accept an offer of admission from Grove City College. If you apply Early
Decision to Grove City College, you should not apply to any other institutions through their
early decision programs, although you may submit applications to other schools under early
action, regular decision, or rolling admission. Upon acceptance to Grove City College
through Early Decision, you must agree to withdraw applications to all other institutions
and submit no additional applications.
If you require a financial aid estimate, be sure to contact the Financial Aid Office
at financialaid@gcc.edu or (724) 458-3300 before applying for admission via Early
Decision.
Your admission decision will be mailed from the College on Dec. 15 (Early Decision
I) or Jan. 15 (Early Decision II). At that time, three decisions may be issued: an acceptance,
a refusal, or a deferral. Accepted students must submit an enrollment deposit of $250 by
Jan. 15 (Early Decision I) or Feb. 15 (Early Decision II). The enrollment deposit includes a
$150 matriculation deposit, which may be refunded after graduation or upon voluntary
withdrawal from the College after matriculation, and a non-refundable matriculation fee of
$100. Deferred students will be considered for admission with Regular Decision applicants
and notified of their admission status on Feb. 20.

ADMISSIONS/ 19

Regular Decision
If you are considering several colleges and plan to choose your school after receiving
admission and scholarship offers, or if you are not prepared to make a binding commitment
to Grove City College upon acceptance, we recommend that you apply for Regular Decision
I deadline (Jan. 20) or Regular Decision II deadline (March 20).
Your admissions decision will be mailed from the College on Feb. 20 (Regular
Decision I) or April 15 (Regular Decision II). At that time, three decisions may be issued:
an acceptance, a refusal, or an offer to be placed on a waiting list (for a limited number of
students). Accepted students must submit an enrollment deposit of $250 by May 1. The
enrollment deposit includes a $150 matriculation deposit, which may be refunded after
graduation or upon voluntary withdrawal from the College after matriculation, and a nonrefundable matriculation fee of $100.
Applications submitted after March 20 are late and will be considered for fall
enrollment as space permits. If space is not available, you may reactivate your application
for admission to the College during the following semester.
Once accepted, through the Early Decision or Regular Decision program, a student
must remain in good academic and social standing during the senior year of high
school. Grove City College reserves the right to withdraw an offer of acceptance if a
significant change occurs in any area of a student's profile.
Dual Enrollment Program
If you are a high school junior or senior, Grove City College invites you to get a head
start on college by taking courses for credit at a reduced cost. As a dual-enrolled student,
you will be classified as a non-degree seeking student and may take courses online
throughout the year, as well as on campus during the fall and spring semesters if you are
local.
You may apply to enroll in courses with available seating, as long as prerequisites have
been met, with permission from the instructor(s). Internships, independent study/research,
study abroad, music ensembles, and music lessons are currently not available to dualenrolled students. Due to California State regulations, California residents are not eligible
to participate in Grove City College’s Dual Enrollment Program. Students are responsible
for following all College policies as stated in the Bulletin (academic policies) and The
Crimson (student life policies).
Applicants are recommended to hold an unweighted cumulative high school grade
point average of 3.50 or higher. To view available terms and courses, as well as registration
deadlines,
application
instructions,
and
required
forms,
visit
www.gcc.edu/dualenrollment or
contact
dualenrollment@gcc.edu. For
additional
information on division classifications and QPA calculations see the Academic Policies
section below.
Early High School Graduation Policy
If you are pursuing early high school graduation, you may apply to Grove City College
as a high school junior, as long as you have utilized all available curricula at your high
school and have communicated your intentions to your guidance counselor prior to applying
to the College. If you have additional high school requirements to complete in order to
graduate, you will be solely responsible for appropriate course enrollment. This includes
seeking high school approval of all required courses before the start of your first semester
at Grove City College.
The Admissions Committee reviews high school junior applications using the same
criteria as for students completing the traditional four-year high school experience. These
criteria include content and rigor of your academic coursework; grades; class rank (if

20 / ADMISSIONS

applicable), standardized test scores; academic and spiritual/character recommendations;
extracurricular involvement; leadership and service; thoughtful response to an essay
prompt; and an optional (but highly recommended) interview with an admissions counselor.
Additionally, you must submit a letter from your guidance counselor endorsing your early
college enrollment.

Selecting a Major
Grove City College recommends that all applicants declare a major. Major selection is
one of the many methods the College uses to shape the freshman class, and because there
are limited openings for each major offered, you will be considered for only one major.
After enrolling at the College, you may change your originally declared major or add an
additional major (pending department approval). Please know that students commonly
switch majors during their time at Grove City College.
If you are undecided about your major, you may select either "Undeclared — Liberal
Arts" or "Undeclared — Sciences." While several majors have a tight, eight-semester
curriculum, others are more flexible. Students should declare a major during their Freshman
year and no later than the end of the Sophomore year— by which point most of our
undeclared students easily find their fit.
Homeschooling Requirements
The College defines a homeschooled student as one who is taught at home by his/her
parent(s)/guardian(s) or by a group of individuals outside the traditional educational
system.
Homeschooling can offer a unique experience. Please follow the application
instructions, including the submission of your transcript(s) and an outline or resume of
extracurricular activities. The transcript should include your course of study and grades
(with a letter grade assigned to each class using a 4.0 GPA system). Standardized test scores
(SAT, ACT, or CLT) should be requested and submitted directly from College Board, ACT,
or CLT. If you do not have official grades, your test scores may be weighted more heavily
to determine your ability to succeed academically at Grove City College. The required
letters of recommendation should be written by people outside the home. Small portfolios
are welcome but not required. An interview is strongly recommended, and you should be
prepared to elaborate on your coursework and activities, as well as your college search and
personal goals.
It is acceptable to supplement your coursework with college-level courses, and you will
be accepted as a freshman and progress to sophomore, junior, and senior class standing
along with your initial cohort.

Transfer Students
If you have already completed high school and have enrolled at a regionally accredited
institution for any college-level course, you should apply to the College as a transfer student
for the fall term (beginning in Aug.) or spring term (beginning in Jan.). You may be admitted
to advanced standing upon presentation of honorable dismissal and acceptable grades. You
must have a minimum cumulative grade point average of 2.0 on a 4.0 scale in order to be
considered for enrollment. Your class standing will be determined by the Registrar's Office.
At this time, applicants for the mechanical engineering major will be handled on a case-bycase basis and are not guaranteed admission due to capacity limits.
The application deadline is Aug. 7 for fall transfer and Jan. 7 for spring transfer. As
transfer admission is rolling, you will receive an admissions decision as soon as your
application file is complete. To access our application and view instructions,
visit www.gcc.edu/transfer.

ADMISSIONS/ 21

If you are applying for financial aid, you should submit your application for admission
and financial aid at the same time, as well as an Unofficial Transfer Credit Evaluation form
and other required documents outlined on our website. Whether you are a candidate for
freshman or upper-class standing, you must present any and all official high school
credentials and college transcripts if you have attended another regionally accredited college
or university.

Transfer Credit
College credit is awarded to those students who have earned a “C” or higher or P/Pass
in courses that have been completed at a regionally accredited institution and approved by
Grove City College for transfer. Transfer credits do not enter into the computation of a
student’s quality point average at the College and may not exceed 50 percent of the total
credits counted toward graduation. At a minimum, 64 credit hours of work are required to
be completed at the College, as well as a minimum of one half of all hours for any major,
minor, certification or concentration.
The College will grant credit to incoming freshmen who have achieved the appropriate
academic standards through Advanced Placement (AP), College Level Examination
Program (CLEP), or International Baccalaureate (IB). College courses taken while in high
school (typically through College in the High School programs) will be evaluated on an
individual basis, depending on course equivalencies, and expected learning outcomes.
students are encouraged to utilize the AP, CLEP, and IB programs rather than through
College in the High School programs at another institution. See the Academic Policies
section for further details.
A high school student who has completed college-level courses prior to his/her high
school graduation will apply as a freshman student. Students who apply and are accepted as
freshmen will enter as freshmen and progress to sophomore, junior, and senior class status
along with their peers.

No-Fee Technology Package
A long-established leader in information technology, Grove City College provides
comprehensive resources to expand learning and equip students to succeed in college and
career. All incoming full-time undergraduate students will receive a no-fee technology
package that includes a business-class lightweight tablet personal computer, auxiliary
equipment, and on-site, same/next day technical support service provided by staff in our
Technological Learning Center (TLC). The TLC provides nearly 100 hours of live-support
service per week. Unlike most schools, Grove City College does not charge a technology
fee
Students are not expected to be computer-literate upon their arrival to campus.
On move-in day, incoming freshmen and transfer students will receive the technology
package with initial training on equipment and software to ensure that they are prepared for
the first day of classes. With these tools, students have seamless access to resources that
significantly shape their learning environment, including high-end software that varies
depending on major and course requirements. In addition to campus-wide wireless access,
full wired ethernet connectivity is available within residence hall rooms and select
classrooms and labs. While enrolled full-time, students retain the issued equipment even at
home during break periods and summer months. Upon completion of degree requirements,
students are granted ownership of the laptop) and accessories, adding value to the package
beyond their student years. For more information, visit www.gcc.edu/technologypackage.
You may also contact the Help Desk in the TLC via phone (724) 458-2255, email
(helpdesk@gcc.edu), or by visiting the physical site of the Help Desk in the Technological
Learning Center.

22 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID
Expenses (2022-2023)
Application for Admission ..................................................................................$ 50.00
Matriculation Fee (non-refundable) .....................................................................100.00
Matriculation Deposit ...........................................................................................150.00
(See Admission section for detailed explanations.)
Fall and Spring Semester Charges – Undergraduate Students:
Full time:
Tuition, 12 to 17 credit hours ....................................................... $ 9,995.00
Tuition, each hour over 17 credit hours ..............................................500.00
Room and Board, Residence Hall, 21 meals per week ....................5,525.00
Colonial Hall Apartments – Room Only .........................................5,265.00
Part time, per credit hour ...............................................................................645.00
Dual Enrollment Program, per credit hour .......................................................190.00
Adult Education (audit only), per credit hour .................................................75.00
May/January Intersession and Winter/Summer Online Charges:
Undergraduate Student:
Tuition, per credit hour ....................................................................$ 415.00
January Intersession, Residence Hall, Room and Board ....................760.00
January Intersession, Colonial Hall Apartments, Room only .............730.00
May Intersession, 13 days, Residence Hall, Room and Board ...........690.00
May Intersession, 17 days, Residence Hall, Room and Board ...........900.00
May Intersession, 13 days, Colonial Hall, Room only .....................665.00
May Intersession, 17 days, Colonial Hall, Room only .....................865.00
Non-Degree Seeking student, per credit hour..................................................415.00
Dual Enrollment Program student, per credit hour ...........................................190.00
Fees for Special Services:
Prevention and Care of Injuries (Exercise Science 251) .................................35.00
Degree Apostille..............................................................................................25.00
Microsoft Certification Fee (MNGT 110) .......................................................90.00
Housing Deposit ............................................................................................200.00
Independent Research (270/370/470 per approved application) ...................200.00
Independent Study (260/360/460 per approved application).........................200.00
Internship Fee (per approved application).....................................................300.00
Laboratory Materials Fee (per course– see Academic Policies, Materials Fee) ............150.00
Late Payment Fee (each assessment) ..............................................................40.00
Music Group Class (Guitar, Organ, Piano and Voice) ..................................150.00
Music Private Lesson (per half-hour, per week) ...........................................435.00
Official Transcript (PDF and expedited shipping are an additional fee) ...........5.50
Online Materials Fee ...................................................................... varies by course
Parking Permit Fee (annual rate) ...................................................................125.00
Print Making, Sculpture, Ceramics Materials Fee ………………………….150.00

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID/ 23

Replacement Diploma .................................................................................... 25.00
Returned Check Fee........................................................................................ 25.00
Returned Electronic Check Fee ...................................................................... 10.00
Student Health Insurance (annual rate) ...................................................... 2,250.00
Study Abroad Fee (Abroad 300 - fall or spring semesters only) .................. 300.00
Technology Fee (Part-time undergraduate students) ……………………….300.00
Travel Course Participant Fee (non-credit participation) ............................. 500.00
The College reserves the right to adjust its charges prior to the beginning of any
semester, although every effort is made to maintain its stated charges throughout the
academic year.

Refunds
Students planning to completely withdraw or transfer from Grove City College must
immediately contact the Registrar Office’s Enrollment Coordinator by emailing
enrollment@gcc.edu or calling (724) 458-2069 to officially withdraw. The official
withdrawal date is determined by the submission of completed withdrawal paperwork to the
Enrollment Coordinator. Students residing in the Residence Halls must complete an official
check-out with the Resident Director. See the Academic Policies section for further details
on withdrawing.

Voluntary Withdrawal – Tuition Charges
A student who voluntarily withdraws from the College may be refunded a portion of the
tuition charges based on the official withdrawal date in accordance with the refund schedule
for the applicable term:
Fall or Spring Semester:
Withdrawal prior to matriculation (first day of classes) ............................ 100% refund
Withdrawal within seven calendar days after matriculation ........................ 75% refund
Withdrawal within fourteen calendar days after matriculation.................... 50% refund
Withdrawal within twenty-one calendar days after matriculation ............... 25% refund
Withdrawal twenty-two or more calendar days after matriculation ............... No refund
January or May Intersession:
Withdrawal prior to the first day of class .................................................. 100% refund
Withdrawal on the first day of class ............................................................ 75% refund
Withdrawal on the second day of class ....................................................... 50% refund
Withdrawal on the third day of class ........................................................... 25% refund
Withdrawal more than three days after class begins....................................... No refund
Winter or Summer Online Session:
Withdrawal prior to the start of the course ................................................ 100% refund
Withdrawal before the end of the drop date ................................................ 75% refund
Withdrawal after the drop date ....................................................................... No refund

Voluntary Withdrawal – Room Charges
A student who voluntarily withdraws from the College may be refunded a portion
of the room charges based on the official check-out date from the residence hall in
accordance with the refund schedule for the applicable term:
Fall or Spring Semester:
Withdrawal prior to matriculation (first day of classes) ............................ 100% refund
Withdrawal within seven calendar days after matriculation ........................ 75% refund

24 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

Withdrawal within fourteen calendar days after matriculation.................... 50% refund
Withdrawal within twenty-one calendar days after matriculation ............... 25% refund
Withdrawal twenty-two or more calendar days after matriculation ............... No refund
January or May Intersession:
Withdrawal prior to the first day of class .................................................. 100% refund
Withdrawal on the first day of class ............................................................ 75% refund
Withdrawal on the second day of class ....................................................... 50% refund
Withdrawal on the third day of class ........................................................... 25% refund
Withdrawal more than three days after class begins....................................... No refund
Room and board are not available during the Winter and Summer online sessions.

Voluntary Withdrawal – Board Charges
A student who voluntarily withdraws from the College may be refunded a prorated
portion of the board charge, which covers the cost of meals, based on the official check-out
date from an upper campus residence hall. Students not residing on upper campus who
purchased a dining option, may be refunded the cost of any unused meals on the option
purchased.
Voluntary Withdrawal – Travel Course
A student who voluntarily withdraws from an off-campus travel course, during any
academic term, will be eligible for a tuition refund as described herein; however, the cost of
transportation or other program expenses incurred on behalf of the student prior to the
withdrawal will be deducted from any refund of the program charges.
Medical/Military Withdrawal
A student who must withdraw from Grove City College upon a physician's written
recommendation or who is a military reservist and is called to active military duty will be
refunded a prorated portion of tuition based on the number of days in attendance. The room
and board charges will also be refunded on a prorated basis according to the official checkout date from the residence hall. These prorated refunds will be granted for medical/military
withdrawal regardless of the time of withdrawal during the semester. Written documentation
supporting the physician’s recommendation must be received by the Student Life &
Learning Office within two weeks of a medical withdrawal.
Housing Deposits
Each spring, students who have indicated their intent to reside on campus the following
fall semester will be charged a housing deposit. The housing deposit is not an increase in
the cost of room and board; rather, the amount of the deposit is later reflected as a reduction
to the amount due on the student’s statement of charges for the upcoming fall semester. This
deposit is refundable if the student notifies the College of his/her withdrawal or changes
his/her housing status to non-resident by June 30th. The deposit is non-refundable if
notification is made on July 1st or later.
Additional Refund Details
The matriculation deposit is refunded upon voluntary withdrawal or after graduation.
No refund of any kind is made when a student is suspended or dismissed from the
College, including, but not limited to, tuition and course fees, room and board, application
and matriculation fees and deposits.

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID/ 25

The guidelines noted above for tuition will also be used to refund financial aid to the
provider of the aid unless specified otherwise by the donor. In the event the student has
received a student loan during the current term, all current Grove City College charges will
be paid and any remaining credit balance, up to the loan amount, will be used to repay the
student loan prior to any refund to the student.
Students who request and are approved to move into the residence halls after the start
of a semester will be charged a prorated amount of the room and board charge based on the
remaining days of the semester starting with the official move in date as arranged with and
confirmed by the Student Life & Learning Office.

Financial Aid Program
The generosity of alumni and friends of the College has made the Grove City College
Financial Aid Program possible. Under the direction of the Board of Trustees, the College
administration makes every effort to keep charges as low as possible, thereby, in effect,
providing every enrolled student with significant financial assistance.
In addition, a number of scholarships, the Grove City College Student Loan, and oncampus work opportunities are available to assist qualified full-time students. Scholarship
assistance is based on need and academic achievement and must be applied for each year.
Although financial assistance is awarded for the full academic year, if changes occur in the
need factor, the College may increase, reduce or withdraw assistance at the beginning of
any semester.
Any student or prospective student seeking financial assistance is required to apply
each year. Full details are available in the Financial Aid Brochure or on the College website
– www.gcc.edu. Every effort is made to provide financial assistance for applicants who
meet the academic qualifications and need requirements; however, all applicants must be
full-time students who are making academic progress. Grove City College does not
discriminate on the basis of age, race, color, sex, marital status, disability, or national or
ethnic origin in the administration of its scholarship and loan programs.
Securing financial aid from any source outside the College is a student's responsibility.
Upon a student's request, the College will certify a student's enrollment and provide other
data with the clear understanding that it is fulfilling a service to its students. The provision
of such service, however, does not indicate that the College is a recipient of the grant or
loan funds received by the student, that it is in any way administering any portion of the
external program, or that it is responsible for decisions made by outside donors or lenders
(private or public). The College performs these limited services for all students seeking
private or public financial aid, except as stated in the following paragraphs:
Grove City College does not accept or certify any loans under the Federal Direct
Student Loan Program (Student or Parent Program) or participate in the William
Ford Direct Loan Program; the Perkins Loan Program; Pell Grants; Robert C. Byrd
Honors Scholarships; Academic Competitiveness Grants; TEACH Grants; SMART
Federal Grants; Supplemental Education Opportunity Grants; Federal Work Study;
President’s Service Challenge Scholarship through the Corporation for National and
Community Service (also known as the AmeriCorps Scholarship); Paul Douglas
Teacher Scholarships; National Science Scholars Program Scholarships; National
Academy of Science, Space, and Technology Grants; Presidential Access Scholarships;
ROTC Scholarships; educational benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs;
assistance through the Office of Health and Human Services (such as grants from the
Office of Vocational Rehabilitation or Blindness and Visual Services); JTPA; or any
other scholarships or loans which may be construed as providing direct or indirect
federal aid to the College. The College will also not allow any student to register for

26 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

classes if it is aware that a student has accepted or received such federal financial aid
for that semester.
Grove City College has carefully reviewed the legislation pertaining to the new GI
Bill (a package of educational benefits available to U.S. military veterans and their
dependents). Unfortunately, the College is unable to receive funds, certify eligibility,
or otherwise participate in this program because it is considered federal financial aid.

Scholarships
The income from a number of endowment funds is available for scholarship aid to
students who qualify on the basis of scholarship, financial need, and character. The
Scholarship Committee awards these scholarships on a year-to-year basis. Applications and
supporting documents must be submitted to the Financial Aid Office on or before April 15
preceding the school year for which scholarship aid is requested (January 15 for students
matriculating mid-year). A continuing Grove City College student must have a cumulative
QPA of 2.00 and earned at least 24 credits during the previous academic year to qualify for
need-based financial aid. Consult the Grove City College Financial Aid Brochure, available
online at www.gcc.edu, for complete details.

How to Apply for Scholarship Aid
All students, prospective and continuing, who are applying for scholarship assistance,
must submit a Grove City College Financial Aid Application to the Financial Aid Office
each year by April 15. The application may be completed and submitted on-line or be
downloaded from the Financial Aid page of the College website.
Grove City College does not participate in any federal aid programs, and it does not
utilize the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) in applying for College
financial aid programs. The FAFSA is generally required in applying for financial aid from
non-federal public sources, such as State Grants, in which students are allowed to
participate. Students should check with the specific aid source to determine which forms are
required for consideration by that source.
To expedite the financial aid process, students should apply as soon after October 1 as
possible. In order for the College to process a Financial Aid Application, students must
include all required documents with the application. Financial aid is awarded annually based
on the aid application deadline and available funds. All applications are due in the Financial
Aid Office by April 15. Applications received from April 16 to July 15 will receive 50% of
the scholarship that otherwise would be awarded. Applications received after July 15 will
not receive a scholarship award. Transfer applicants should contact the Financial Aid Office
regarding deadlines.
Financial aid decisions cannot be made until the student has been accepted for
admission. Although applicants must be offered admission to Grove City College to receive
need-based financial aid, applicants should not wait for an offer of admission before
applying for financial aid. Beginning December 15, accepted students will be emailed an
award letter within one week of receipt of a completed application along with all supporting
documents in the Financial Aid Office.
Students seeking financial aid must reapply for financial aid and loans each year.
Loan Funds
Students who need help in meeting their educational expenses may borrow money
using the Grove City College Student Loan program or any other private loan program of
their choice. Grove City College student loan applications will be available on-line after
April 1 each year. Please contact the Financial Aid Office to verify the College’s
participation in the program before applying for other private loan funds.

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID/ 27

The Grove City College Student Loan
Individuals who are at least half-time students of Grove City College and who are US
citizens or permanent US residents are eligible to apply for the Grove City College Student
Loan Program. Loans under this program are based on creditworthiness. Returning students
must have a Cumulative Quality Point Average (CQPA) of 2.00 or higher and have earned
at least 24 credits during the previous academic year to satisfy the academic progress
requirements of the program. The annual amount available for freshmen is limited to the
cost of education less other financial aid, not to exceed $12,000. The annual amount
available for sophomores, juniors, and seniors is limited to the cost of education less other
financial aid, not to exceed $17,000 per year, for a lifetime maximum of $63,000. There are
no origination fees for loans under this program, and interest is variable quarterly based on
prime plus a margin. Repayment of the loan may be deferred until the student leaves school.
All students who receive a Grove City College Student Loan must attend a Collegesponsored seminar on debt management after receiving their first loan, to receive any
additional loans. A second seminar, on credit, is required during their sophomore year.
Applications for loans should be completed three weeks prior to needing the funds for
payment.
Academic Progress
Grove City College defines academic progress as earning a minimum of 24 credit hours
during a single academic year (September through August). Students must make academic
progress to remain eligible for financial aid from the College and for the GCC Student Loan.
Additionally, students may be subject to the academic progress standard for scholarships,
grants or loans received from sources outside of Grove City College, such as Pennsylvania
State Grants, and should refer to the guidelines for each program for complete details.
The College’s Financial Aid Office reviews all academic records at the conclusion of
each spring semester to ensure students are making academic progress and to determine
eligibility for the College’s Student Loan program. A student who drops courses; withdraws
entirely from a semester; or receives either “F – failing” or “I – incomplete” grades may fall
below the minimum of 24 earned credit hours required for satisfactory academic progress.
These students will be ineligible to receive financial aid from the College and through the
Grove City College Student Loan Program until academic progress has been made.
A student who fails to make academic progress and is denied financial aid may submit
a written appeal, with supporting documentation, to the College’s Financial Aid Office
within 14 days of being denied financial aid.

Work Opportunities
A number of positions are available on campus for full-time students who need to
support themselves financially. Students who excel in some fields are often given an
opportunity to serve as departmental, laboratory, or library assistants. Applications for work
on campus may be completed by accessing the “Campus Services” tab within the myGCC
portal and clicking on the “Student Employment link on the left-hand side menu.
Scholarships
The income from a number of endowment funds is available for scholarship aid to
students who qualify on the basis of scholarship, financial need, and character. The
Scholarship Committee awards these scholarships on a year-to-year basis. Applications and
supporting documents must be submitted to the Financial Aid Office on or before April 15
preceding the school year for which scholarship aid is requested (January 15 for students
matriculating mid-year). A continuing Grove City College student must have a cumulative

28 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

QPA of 2.00 and have successfully earned at least 24 credits during the previous academic
year to qualify for need based financial aid. Consult the Grove City College Financial Aid
Brochure, available online at www.gcc.edu, for complete details.

Scholarship and Financial Aid Funds
The following funds have been provided to support current scholarships and financial
aid awards to Grove City College students. A number of these funds include restrictions that
have been specified by the donor:
James and Arlene Adams Student Aid Fund
Frances E. Adams ’41 Scholarship Endowment
The Adams Gordon Family Scholarship Endowment and Pass-through
Evan and Bethany Addams Redemptive Work Scholarship Endowment
Addison Gibson Foundation Scholarship
Alden Challenge Scholarship
Alpha Beta Tau Alumnae Scholarship Endowment
The Alumni Association Scholarship Fund
Ron ’82 and Diane (Holt ’82) Anderson Scholarship
The John Appleby Arnold ’58 Four-Fold Scholarship Fund
Arnold Family Music Scholarship Fund
Edward P. and Rosalyn B. Arters Tomorrow's Leaders Scholarship Endowment
Robert B. and Joyce Webb ’60 Asher Scholarship Endowment
Babcock Scholars Program Scholarship
The Babcock Scholarship Fund
Frank R. Bailey, Jr. Memorial Scholarship Fund
John Logan Bailey Memorial Scholarship Fund
Robert W. Baird, Jr. and Lily L. Baird Memorial Scholarship Fund
Barnabas Scholarship
Howard O. and Pauline D. Barnes Scholarship Fund
The Jay L. Barnes ’52 Memorial Scholarship Fund
Susan Beatty ’50 Barnhart Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Dr. Bonnie B. Barr ’59 Family Scholarship Endowment
James Willard ’43 and Elizabeth Knapp ’42 Batey Scholarship
Baucus & Co. Scholarship Endowment
Donald ’60 and Barbara (Tregembo ’61) Bauer Scholarship Endowment
The Bauer Family Scholarship Endowment
The Carrie Graham Bauer Trust Scholarship Fund
Beadle-Warren Scholarship
The Bechtell Family Scholarship Fund
The Beckett Family Scholarship Endowment
The R. Jack Behringer Scholarship Fund
Bell Memorial Fund
Paul G. Benedum, Jr. Leadership Scholarship
Dr. George W. Bennett Scholarship Fund
Berglund Family Military Service Scholarship
Alan G. and Karen Bergman Scholarship
Thomas F. ’74 and Mary Ann Berkey Scholarship in Electrical Engineering
Beta Sigma Alumni Association Scholarship Endowment
Jean Ann Bialas, M.D. Scholarship Endowment
John A. Blair 1892 Scholarship Endowment
Janet Williamson ’71 Bliss Scholarship Fund

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID/ 29

The Board Designated Financial Aid Fund
The Board Designated Scholarship Fund
Dr. Natalie (Orlowsky ’56) Bodnaruk Scholarship Endowment
Mildred Bohlander Fund
Frances M. Borell and Leslie C. Borell Memorial Trust Scholarships
Edward ’37 & Ruth ’40 Bowden Scholarship Endowment
William ’72 and Carla Bowlin Faith and Integrity Accounting Scholarship
Bradford Academy Merit Scholarship
Ronald W. ’64 and Joyce E. Brandon Academic Scholarship
Louis C. Brody Memorial Scholarship Fund
Dr. Douglas A. and Susan K. Browne Scholarship Endowment
The Rev. John A. Buckley ’63 Scholarship Endowment
The W. Clifton Bulette III Memorial Scholarship Fund
Major A. P. Burchfield Scholarship
Dr. Florence L. Burger Scholarship Fund
Bush Family Scholarship
Verne (Herbert ’43) Cabooris Scholarship Endowment
The John N. Calderwood Scholarship Fund
The Callahan Special Education Certification Scholarship Endowment
The Timothy J. Callahan ’82 Accounting Scholarship Endowment
Thomas William Callen Fund
The Campus Enrichment Scholarship
Philip Carpenter Scholarship Endowment
Eleanor M. Caruthers Fund
Dino C. Casali Scholarship Endowment
David O. ’71 and Kathleen Pickens ’70 Cashdollar Scholarship Endowment
Oliver F. Cashdollar Sr. Scholarship Endowment
Samuel G Sr and Patricia Ann Casolari Scholarship Endowment
Boyd E. ’37 and Mary (Poellet ’38) Cass Scholarship Endowment
David and Patricia Castrodale Scholarship Endowment
Bryce N. Chaney and Erin E. Chaney, M.D. Scholarship Endowment
The Church of the Covenant Scholarship
Lou Church Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Joseph C. Cicero, Jr. Scholarship Endowment
Cincinnati Freshmen Scholarship
Class of ’37 Scholarship
Class of 1963 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 1967 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 1968 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Class of 1969 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Class of 1970 Memorial Scholarship
Class of 1992 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 1993 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 1994 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 2011 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 2012 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 2013 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 2015 Scholarship Endowment
Class of 2017 Scholarship Endowment
James R. Clifford, M.D. Entrepreneurship Scholarship Prize
Charles S. Coen & Mary Coen Family Foundation Scholarship Endowment

30 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

Tom and Priscilla Connally Memorial Scholarship Fund
Carol Imbt Cooper Scholarship Endowment
Cooper Family Scholarship Endowment
Oscar A. Cooper Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Jessie Henderson Coulter Scholarship
John R. ’49 and Kathryn (VanEman’48) Couy Scholarship Endowment
The Clifford L. and Joanne H. Cox Award for Excellence in Music
H. J. Crawford Scholarship Trust
Critchlow Family Scholarship
Dr. Robert B. Cross ’37 and Dr. Gertrude E. Cross Memorial Scholarship
Eugene J. Dabkowski ’60 Scholarship Endowment
Jean Francis Wandrisco ’45 Daly and William G. Daly Scholarship
Davis Elkins Foundation STEM Scholarship
Robert F. Davis III ’17 Scholarship
Deacon Family Scholarship Endowment
Jane G. Dean Memorial Scholarship Endowment
DeAngelo Family Scholarship Endowment and Pass-through
Bernice F. Dell Scholarship Fund
Delta Iota Kappa Fraternity Alumni Association Scholarship
The Arthur and Tana de Ponceau Student Aid Fund
Evelyn and Walter Dietrick Scholarship Endowment
The Diane M. Dixon Scholarship Endowment in World Literature
The James G. Dixon III Scholarship Endowment in Theatre and Shakespeare
Donahue Family Foundation Scholarship Endowment
Duerr Family Scholarship Endowment
Neal F. Dukelow Memorial Scholarship Fund
Donald E. Eckert ’66 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Dr. and Mrs. John D. Ellis Memorial Scholarships
Dr. Cindy (Bowser ’80) Elmore Scholarship Endowment
Anna Belle Yoder Emery ’54 Scholarship Fund
Engineering Leadership Scholarship
Benjamin Enloe Scholarship Endowment
Epsilon Pi Alumni Association/Dr. Ralph Carlson ’62 Scholarship Endowment
Epsilon Pi Alumni Association/Dwight Guthrie Scholarship Fund
Epsilon Pi Alumni Association/Jack E. Schlossnagel ’51 Scholarship Endowment
Robert ’93 and April Eschweiler Scholarship Endowment
Joann Rebekah Weissert Etter ’50 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
The Fairbaugh Family Scholarship Endowment
Kenneth J. and Florence Borland Evans Family Scholarship Endowment
J. Russell Fawley Scholarship
Patricia (Connell ‘750 Ferrey and Robert V. Ferry Jr. Scholarship
C. Fred Fetterolf ’52 Scholarship Endowment
Fifty Year Financial Aid Fund
Richard J. ’50 and June Filer Scholarships in Management
Barbara (Northeimer ’68) Fish Memorial Scholarship
The Thomas A. Fittante, II Scholarship Endowment
The Foley-Borkey Family Scholarship Endowment
Richard L. Forsythe ’64 Scholarship Endowment
Ross and Barbara Foster Merit Scholarship Endowment
Richard E. Fox Economics Scholarship Endowment
The Fryan Family Scholarship

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID/ 31

The Full Circle Scholarship
Gamma Chi Alumnae Scholarship Endowment
Gamma Sigma Phi Alumnae Scholarship
General Scholarship Endowment
Carl and Mildred Giesmann Scholarship Endowment
The Toni Ann Giles Memorial Fund
The Frederick R. and Lois R. Gilmore Scholarship
The Dr. Hugh R. Gilmore, Jr. Scholarship Fund
Oran Harold Goehring ’27 Memorial Scholarship
Joseph F. Goncz Scholarship in Engineering
Rose Goldstein Memorial Fund
The Great Commission Scholarship
Park Greenwell Scholarship Fund
Andrew C. Greer ‘70 Scholarship
J. Larry ’69 and Barbara (Tune ’70) Griswold Scholarship
Guadalupe Center of Immokalee Scholarship Fund at Grove City College
Hadley Scholarship Fund
Hall-Thomas Scholarships Fund
William E. Hall ’44 Memorial Scholarship Fund
The Haller Scholarship Endowment
Mary Esther (Cruikshank ’45) Halstead Scholarship Endowment
Isabelle Bashline Hammond Fund
Shawn P. ’91 and Karen (Semler ’92) Hanlon Scholarship Endowment
Emma J. Harbison Scholarship
Brett A. Hardt ’79 Scholarship Endowment
The John Stanley ’25 and Helen Calderwood ’23 Harker Memorial Scholarship Fund
Joseph A. Hartman Jr. ’50 and Elizabeth A. Hartman Family Scholarship Endowment
John J. Havrilla Memorial Scholarship Fund
C. N. and Ruth Hayes Scholarship Endowment
Don ’59 and Linda Hayes Scholarship Fund
Rod Haynes ’71 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Paul W. and Elaine J. Haynie Scholarship Endowment given in honor of Dr. Charles S.
MacKenzie
Harry Heasley Scholarship Fund
Marguerite Anne Heine ’69 Memorial Scholarship
Ethel Hall Henderson ’39 Memorial Scholarship
Forrest C. Henderson ’24 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Thomas and Marjorie (Dorer ’64) Heney Accounting Scholarship Endowment
Hill, Barth & King LLC Scholarship Endowment
Phyllis M. Hill ’48 Scholarship
Dr. William M. and Kathleen P. Hinton Scholarship Endowment in memory of Kathleen
Michael W. ’84 and Susan (Spencer ’85) Hoag Scholarship Endowment
Homan Legacy Scholarship Endowment
Albert A. Hopeman Memorial Scholarship
Lynn G. Hopeman Scholarship
Hopeman Financial Aid Fund
Hopeman Freshman Scholarship
The Hopeman School of Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship
Gerald D. ’44 and Nancy (Sipe’45) Householder Scholarship Endowment
Dr. George B. Howley Scholarship
Creig Hoyt Award

32 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

John and Winifred Hoyt Scholarship Endowment
Adeline (Blair ’35) Humphrey Scholarship Endowment
J. Douglas and Jean B. James Scholarship Endowment Fund
Laurie Anne Jarboe Scholarship
June Jenkins ’61 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Jessie Joy Bible Yan ’91 Scholarship Endowment
Richard G. Jewell ’67, J.D. and Dayl E. Jewell Scholarship Endowment
Stan M. ’60 and Karen Johnson Office of International Education Scholarship
Endowment
Stan M. ’60 and Karen Johnson Scholarship Endowment
William M. “Skip” Johnson ’76 Scholarship Endowment
Scott ’55 and Anne (Whitely ’57) Johnston Scholarship Endowment
Donald B. and Grace E. Jones Scholarship Endowment
Kappa Alpha Phi Alumni Association Scholarship Endowment
Edward G. Karl Scholarship Endowment
Karpinski Engineering Merit Scholarship Endowment
Frederick A. Kaufman Financial Aid Fund
Keefer Memorial Scholarship Fund
The Keener Family Scholarship Endowment
The H. Walter Kellen, PE ’38 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
James A. and Martha G. Kennedy Chemistry Scholarship Endowment
David W. Ketler Memorial Financial Aid Fund
Ellen Bell Ketler Fund
Kathryn and David L. Kiesling Memorial Scholarship Endowment
L. David Kiselica ’99 Scholarship Endowment
Knapp Family Scholarship Endowment
The Knecht Family Scholarship
F.W. Knecht III Memorial Entrepreneurship Scholarship Endowment
Janice Conn Koontz Scholarship
Kopnisky Family Scholarship Endowment
Koppers Financial Aid Fund
Andrew S. Korim Original Thought Senior Scholarship Endowment
Ronald Kenneth Kradel Memorial Scholarship Endowment
James Donald Kreidle ’54 Scholarship Endowment
Frederick W. Kretzer ’56 and Peter N. Kutulakis ’56 Scholarship Endowment
Frederick S. Kring Leadership Award
Hilda Adam Kring Communication Arts Award
Elizabeth (Lengel ’56) Kuehnle Memorial Scholarship
Sandra Stump Labbitt ’70 Scholarship
Dr. Jonathan B. Ladd Memorial Award
The Herbert Lamberson and Myrna Lamberson Scholarship Endowment
Jay ’99 and Chris Langley STEM Scholarship Endowment
Heath and Eleanor Larry Scholarship Fund
Richard M. Larry ’60 Scholarship Fund
Eugene A. Larson ’64 Scholarship in Engineering
Law and Business Scholarship
Frank and Edna Lawrence Memorial Scholarship Fund
The Bruce P. Leasure ’76 Memorial Scholarship
Marian G. Lechner ’37 Scholarship Endowment
Ralph G. Leighty, M.D. Memorial Scholarship of Grove City College
Amelia Katherine (Fritz) Lenze Scholarship Fund

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID/ 33

Richard A. Leo Physics Scholarship Endowment
M. William Lightner, Jr. ’56 Scholarship Endowment
Sarah Robertson Linn ’26 Scholarship Endowment
The Lobaugh Scholarship Fund
Lockhart Scholarship Fund
Coach James E. Longnecker Scholarship Endowment
Marie C. Lush Fund
Mary Ann (Martin ’69) Mabbett Scholarship Endowment
Charles S. MacKenzie Student Aid Fund
The Florence E. MacKenzie Memorial Scholarship Fund
LaVonne (Rudolph ’56) MacKenzie Scholarship Endowment
Magee Family Fund
Alan M. Majewski ’94 Scholarship
Richard B. Manley ’67 and Jeri Manley ODK Scholarship
The Marcia Manning Christian Scholarship
Marketing Scholarship
Marshall Family Scholarship Endowment and Pass-through
James Edwin Marshall, 1898, Scholarship Fund
Josephine H. Marshall ’10 Scholarship
The Thomas B. Martin Memorial Scholarship
Deborah R. Marziano ’71 Scholarship Endowment
Milford “Miff” McBride ’44 Scholarship Endowment
Lee C. and Zella W. McCandless ’23 Fund
McClure Scholarship Endowment
The Allen ’52 and Melissa (Henry ’56) McClymonds Family Scholarship Endowment
The Helene McCue ’51 Scholarship Fund
Jean Burns McCurdy 1901, William Donaghy McCurdy 1901 and Nancy McCurdy 1942
Memorial Scholarship
The McCurdy Memorial Scholarship Fund
The McDowell Scholarship Fund
Mrs. Ella K. McKelvey Scholarship
David E. McKillop Scholarship Endowment
William W. McKinney Scholarship Fund
McKonly and Asbury-Devon Driver Memorial Scholarship
David G. McMillen ’60 Scholarship Endowment
McMullen Scholarship Fund
Joanne and William McVay Family Endowed Student Fellow Scholarship
William Francis McVay and David Hurst Special Education Certification Scholarship
Endowment
William and Joann Tresham Mehaffey Tomorrow’s Leaders Scholarship Endowment
Walter ’11, Peter ’13, and Amy ’15 Melnik Merit Scholarship Endowment in Memory of
Samuel R. and Mary G. Smith
Mephibosheth Scholarship Fund
Harry T. and Dorothy N. Mercer Scholarship Fund
The Merwin Student Aid Fund
The Military Service Scholarship
Miller Family Scholarship
J. Melvin Miller Scholarship Fund
Margaret (Romesburg ’64) Miller Scholarship Endowment
Mary Jane Miller and Ruth Sample Miller Memorial Award
The Ministerial Scholarship Fund

34 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

The Dave Molenaor and Joe Clifford Merit Scholarship Endowment
Peter H. and Frances S. Monsma Memorial Scholarship Fund
Joseph D. Monteleone Scholarship
James H. Montgomery Scholarship Fund
The Robert R. ’31 and Josephine M. Montgomery Scholarship Fund
The Moon Family Scholarship Endowment
The Mary R. Moore Scholarship
Sue Corbett Moore Scholarship for International Studies
Thelma Baltz Morrow (Class of 1925) Fund
Harry ’66 and Beverly Morton Scholarship
Moser Scholarship Fund
The Mueller-Ridley Family Legacy Scholarship
Dr. Karl T. Naegele ’79 Scholarship Endowment
Harriet (Hughes ’41) Naser Scholarship Endowment
M. Jack Naser ’42 Scholarship Endowment
Earl F. ’50 and Helen Neely Scholarship Endowment
1970’s Decade Scholarship Endowment
Robert Nivison Memorial Fund
The No Plain Jane Foundation Scholarship Endowment
Nu Lambda Phi Alumni Scholarship Endowment
The Nutt Family Scholarship
Steven D. Nye Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Roger W. Oates ’84 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
The Walter J. O'Connor Scholarship Fund
Odd Fellows and Rebekahs Association of Western Pennsylvania Scholarship Endowment
Moser Oldroyd Scholarship Fund
Edward F. Olechovsky Scholarship for Classical Study
Omicron Xi Alumni Association Scholarship Endowment
The Edward O'Neil Scholarship
John David Ormerod ’92 Memorial Merit Scholarship
The Walter E. Page ’11 Scholarship
A. J. & Sigismunda Palumbo Scholarship
Pan Sophic Alumni Association Scholarship Endowment
The James ’61 and Lynne ’60 Passilla Scholarship
Carol Elizabeth Patterson Memorial Scholarship
The Carolyn (Marziale ’73) Patterson Scholarship
Margaret C. Patterson Scholarship Fund
Margaret M. Patterson Scholarship Fund
Maurice R. Patterson Financial Aid Fund
Paul W & Elaine J Scholarship
Nancy (Lee ’54) Paxton Scholarship Endowment
The Paul ’68 and Judy (Uecker ’69) Pendergast Scholarship Endowment
Nancy A. (Rea ’73) and Alan L. Perlman Scholarship Endowment
Frank J. Plecity ’56 Scholarship Endowment
Robert M. Perry Scholarship Endowment
Perspectives Scholarship
Jennie E. Pettit Scholarship
Phi Sigma Chi Alumnae Scholarship
Phi Tau Alpha Fraternity Alumni Association Memorial Scholarship Endowment
The Dr. and Mrs. Arthur William Phillips Scholarship
The Phillips Interdisciplinary Endowment Fund

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID/ 35

Marjorie McCune and Fred E. Pickens Scholarship Endowment
Barbara (Azalos ’69) Price Scholarship
The Earl K. Price Memorial Scholarship
Betty ’38 and Bob Prince Scholarship Fund
The Private Financial Aid Fund
James Ramsey Memorial Scholarship Fund
The Reader's Digest Endowed Scholarship Fund
The Red Fred Psychology and Philosophy Award
The Lawrence W. Reed ’75 Scholarship Endowment
Walter D. Reed ’42 Scholarship Endowment
Rudolph Rex Reeder Political Science Scholarship
Paul E. and Dorothy F. Reese Scholarship Endowment
C. Dale Reis ’67 Scholarship Fund
Frederick G. Reiter Memorial Fund
Elizabeth McNary ’42 Reno Memorial Music Scholarship Endowment
David T. Richards ’58 Entrepreneurship Scholarship Endowment
Glenda Gilmore Richards ’30 and Alan Windsor Richards Financial Aid Fund
Larry W. Riley ’83 Accounting Scholarship
William Rindfoos Scholarship Fund
The John V. Ritts Fund
Richard S. Robinson, Sr. Science and Technology Scholars Endowment
Frances B. Rohm Music Scholarship
John ’85 and Kathleen (Shipley ’85) Romain Merit Scholarship
Roman Family Scholarship
Margaret Romesburg Miller Scholarship
James and Elizabeth Rutledge Scholarship Fund
The Samaritan Scholarship based on John 4
Carl M. and Marian T. Sautter Scholarship Fund
The Sarah Schenk Honors Scholarship in English
Marion P. Schleiden Scholarship Fund
Madge Lowayne Schlemmer Scholarship
Kent A. Schooler ’79 Scholarship
Schulenburg Family Scholarship
Lois Schulte-Place Fund
Schwab Family Scholarship Endowment
Scott Electric Foundation Scholarship
C. J. Seltzer Family Heritage Scholarship Fund
Dr. Hans F. Sennholz Scholarship
Hans F. Sennholz Freshmen Scholars Endowment
Agnes L. Seyfert Scholarship Endowment
Jane Toy Shaner Memorial Scholarship
Raymond Shannon Endowed Scholarship
William Shannon Memorial Fund
Dr. John T. Shaw Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Permelia Baldwin Shoemaker Award
The Shoemaker-Gibson Scholarship Fund
Sigma Alpha Sigma Alumni Scholarship
Sigma Delta Phi Alumnae Scholarship
Sigma Theta Chi Alumnae Scholarship
The Thomas L. Singley, M.D. ’53 and June Chappell Singley ’53 Scholarship Endowment
Robert H. Sisler Memorial Award

36 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

The Dr. Alexander Slavcoff ’27 and Dorothy Strain Slavcoff ’29 Memorial Scholarship
Fund
D. N. Slep Scholarship
Smith Family Legacy Scholarship Endowment
A. Bruce Smith ’31 Memorial Scholarship Fund
The Anning Hiram Smith, Sr. and Doris Ann Smith Scholarship Fund
Dr. Bruce E. ’58 and Megan Walters ’58 Smith Scholarship Endowment
Smith-Trevitt Scholarship Endowment
Dale O. Smock Memorial Fund
Gary R. Smolnik Jr. ’98 Scholarship Endowment
Lt. Barrett A. Snyder ’08 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Dr. George W. Southworth 1914 Scholarship Endowment
Special Education Certification Scholarship Endowment
Lori Bolz Spivey ’72 Scholarship Endowment
Robert L. Squibb ’54 and Janet Loach Squibb ’59 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
The Stahl Family Scholarship Endowment
The Josephine Pinkerton Stahl Scholarship Fund
Stantec Scholarship for Engineering
The Jim Stark ’51 and Fran Stark Scholarship
David G. ’77 and Rebekah (Maclay ’78) Steele Scholarship
Scholarship Endowment in Loving Memory of Beverly Arnold Stephansen ’83
Stevenson Scholarship Fund
William C. and Gay O. Stewart Scholarship
The Adah Montgomery Sticht Memorial Scholarship
The Dorothy Turnbach Stickney ’31 Scholarship Fund
Ronald E. Stoops Scholarship Fund
The Strabel Family Scholarship
W. Bradley Strauch, M.D. ’99 and Stephanie (Sturgeon ’99) Strauch Scholarship
Endowment
The Helen Beatty Strohm ’39 Scholarship Fund
The Student Achievement Scholarship Fund
Student Financial Aid Fund
Student Freedom Scholarship Fund
Grady ’99 and Corinne (Forney ’98) Summers Merit Scholarship Endowment
The Glen and Mary Sutherland Scholarship
The Sutton Scholarship Fund
Swezey/Janicki Research Scholarship Endowment
Synod I Minority & Underprivileged Scholarship
J. Michael and Elizabeth (Davis ’55) Taipale Mathematics Scholarship Endowment
Team GCC Scholarship Endowment
Theta Alpha Pi Sorority Alumni Association Scholarship
Thomas Family Scholarship Endowment
Clinton Arthur Thomas and Kermit Bennett Thomas Scholarship
Thomas-Riley Scholarship Endowment
The George William Thompson & Kathryn Rebecca Ralston Thompson Scholarship Fund
Louise T. Thompson and Brose E. Thompson ’32 Scholarship Endowment
The Thomas Ewing Thompson, Jr., MD ’29 and Ruth (Daubenspeck ’30) Thompson
Scholarship Endowment
The James D Thorne Education Award Scholarship
The M. C. Throckmorton Financial Aid Fund
Throckmorton Foundation Scholarship

EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID/ 37

Willard J. Tillotson Jr. Scholarship Endowment
Timson-Eaton-MacKenzie Scholarship Endowment
John A., Albert H., and Alfretta Tomlinson Ruff Scholarship
Tri-Sigma/Tri-Zeta Scholarship Endowment
Trustee Academic Scholarships
Anne Richards Turner ’34 Scholarship
The Dr. Mary Irene Uber ’41 Memorial Scholarship
The Ujano Family Scholarship Endowment
Beatrice and Harry Vernoy Scholarship Endowment
Ludwig Von Mises Scholars at Grove City College
Janet A. Wagner ’63 Scholarship Endowment
Harvey ’74 and Linda (Bauer ’75) Wagner Scholarship Endowment
Richard W. Walker Memorial Scholarship
J. B. Wallace Scholarship
Mary Ellen Wandel Scholarship Fund
Joseph M. Wandrisco ’39 Scholarship Endowment
William Ward Wasson Scholarship Fund
Margaret Ruth (Welsh ’13) Weeks Scholarship Endowment
John C. and Elizabeth C. Weidman Scholarship Fund
Dr. Alan H. Weigand ’55 and Dr. Warren M. Sacripant Memorial Scholarship
Endowment
Nancy Weller ’58 Scholarship Endowment
The John R. and Joan F. Werren Scholarship
Harold D. Whieldon Student Scholarship Fund
Karen Gleeson ’68 Wickerham Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Jean Alice Wilson Scholarship Fund
The Harold ’50 and Dorothy (Brown ’50) Winters Scholarship
The Wiseman Family Scholarship
Donald L. Wolfe ’61 Scholarship Endowment
Richard G. ’59 and Sandra (Dick ’60) Wolfe Scholarship
Women's Club of Grove City College (Pittsburgh) Scholarship Fund
Marilyn M and John F Woodhouse Family Scholarship Endowment
Maurice E. Wright 1898 Scholarship
The Jessie Joy Bible Yang ’91 Scholarship Endowment
Edward G. Young ’52 Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Young Life Scholarship Endowment.
Warren L. Youngblood ’78 Scholarship Endowment
Eugene Zeller Scholarship Fund
Andrew D. Zima ’65 Scholarship Endowment
Margaret C. Zimmerman Student Aid Fund
Diana Lee (Hunter ‘69) Humfeld Scholarship Endowment
Dr. Jessica (Bishop '97) Funk Scholarship Endowment
Sems Family Scholarship Endowment
Cooksey Legacy Scholarship Endowment
Havtech Scholarship Endowment
Class of 1971 Scholarship Endowment
Derek Lohr ‘16 Scholarship Endowment
Donald E. Chab Memorial Scholarship Endowment
Cates Family Scholarship Endowment
Twanna Powell Scholarship Endowment
Julia Louise Brutt Memorioal Scholarship Endowment

38 / EXPENSES AND FINANCIAL AID

Helen & Ellison Davison Scholarship Endowment
Robert Vander Molen Scholarship Endowment
John R. Walshak Scholarship Endowment
Pew-Crile Nursing Scholarship Endowment
Doug & Linda Muetzel Scholarship Endowment
Jack S. Isherwood ‘63 Scholarship Endowment
Johnston Family Scholarship Endowment
John ‘63 & Kathryn Tosh Scholarship Endowment
Mittelman Family Legacy Scholarship Endowment
Howard J. Stanley Scholarship Endowment
Frank J. Plecity ‘56 Scholarship Endowment
Robert McClements Jr. Scholarship Endowment
Dr. Hardold L. Conder Scholarship Endowment
Trail Life USA Scholarship Endowment
Andy Hromyak ‘95 & Steve DeCaspers ‘98 Scholarship Endowment
The Thomas Ewing Thompson, Jr., MD, '29 and Ruth (Daubenspeck '30) Thompson
Scholarship Endowment
Helen (Franke '53) George Legacy Scholarship Endowment
Mary Ann (Martin '69) Mabbett Scholarship Endowment
Throckmorton Graduate Scholarship
Ronald W. '64 and Joyce E. Brandon Nursing Scholarship
Derek Lohr '16 Scholarship Endowment
Robert McBurney Scholarship
Cates Family Scholarship
Chambers Family Scholarship

STUDENT LIFE/ 39

STUDENT LIFE
General Rules and Regulations
Students in a free society have the right to choose the college that best suits their needs,
interests, and personal lifestyles. Those same students, having chosen their college, have the
responsibility to observe the policies and standards of the college they select. As one might
anticipate, members of the Grove City College campus community are expected to adhere
to high Christian moral standards. We believe these historic Judeo-Christian standards of
conduct are essential to the maintenance of a campus environment in which the search for
meaning in life and a rational pursuit of knowledge can best be accomplished. A student's
enrollment at Grove City College thus involves an agreement with the College that he/she
will obey the academic and co-curricular standards of the College.
For a detailed description of the College’s community standards and disciplinary
policies, please refer to the current student handbook, The Crimson. Violations of College
regulations and policies will be dealt with administratively by the Office of Student Life
and Learning. Violations of civil law will be reviewed by the College and may also result
in disciplinary action. The College reserves the right to exclude at any time students whose
conduct or cooperation it regards as unsatisfactory without assigning any further reason.
Neither the College nor its officers shall be under any liability whatsoever for such
exclusion.
It is also expected that students will observe standards of appearance, which will
encourage self-respect and enhance an individual's self-image. Some departments may also
set specific standards of appearance as part of the student's professional preparation.
Though the College seeks the comfort and well-being of students on campus, it cannot
assume responsibility for students when they leave campus.

Residence Halls
The College's residence halls and student apartments were built not only to ensure
convenient and adequate housing for students, but also to foster the social unity of the
College, and to enhance the total learning environment and experience. Therefore, all fulltime students, except commuter students who reside with their families, are required to room
and board on campus. Commuter students at Grove City College are full-time traditionalaged students who live at their parents’ or legal guardian’s full-time legal place of residence,
normally within a radius of forty miles of Grove City. With advanced approval, special
permission may also be granted for a student to live with a primary non-peer relative other
than his or her parents or a legal guardian.
Some students who meet specific requirements may be permitted or required to live
off-campus. Those returning to college from the working world may qualify for approved
off-campus status if there is a significant age differential between them and those who make
up their class. Normally, students who will be twenty-three years of age prior to the first
day of fall classes will also be considered in this category. Certain students, for medically
documented reasons, may also be considered for off-campus status. Students older than 25
or with more than four years of post-secondary college experience are required to live off
campus. Married students must provide confirmation of their marital status in order to live
off campus, as the College does not provide married housing. Students in these categories
may choose their own housing in the community, but the College reserves the right to
require a student to move to another location, or to move on campus, if the College
determines there to be a sufficient health, safety, academic or moral concern. All off-campus

40 / STUDENT LIFE

housing for students must be registered with and authorized by the College. The College
does not provide housing for part-time, post-baccalaureate, or special status students.
The College, while endeavoring to provide attractive housing for resident students,
retains all rights of ownership, and therefore considers that all who reside in its facilities
agree to abide by all College regulations applying to campus housing. Students are
responsible for the proper use of their residence hall rooms and for any violations of College
standards taking place in them. The College reserves the right to inspect any room at any
time. However, every effort will be made to respect the privacy of our students. The College
also reserves the right to require a resident to move whenever the best interests of the
College appear to demand such action.
The College cannot be responsible for loss of personal property of residence hall
students due to theft, fire, wind, rain, flooding or disruptions to electrical service or naturally
occurring catastrophes from rain and/or flooding. It is strongly recommended that insurance
protection be carried by each student against loss and/or damage to personal property. The
foregoing notwithstanding, however, should loss occur due to negligence of the College,
the College will be responsible for the direct damage, but not indirect or consequential
damage, as a result of the loss. The College will not be responsible, however, if the
proximate negligence or willful conduct causing the loss is that of another student and/or
another individual not acting as an employee of and/or without specific authority of the
College.

Campus Safety
Grove City College offers students a safe and secure campus environment. The
College enjoys a close, cooperative relationship with both state and local police, and
criminal conduct by a student or employee is grounds for immediate suspension and/or
dismissal. The Campus Safety Department is responsible for maintaining the security of
the College community and facilities. The Director of Campus Safety reports to the Vice
President for Student Life and Learning and works closely with Student Life and Learning
personnel and other departments. The campus is monitored and evaluated 24 hours a day
by Safety personnel on foot, in vehicles and/or on bicycles. The department answers the
campus emergency extension at (724) 458-3000 24 hours a day and they actively monitor
fire alarm, sprinkler and intrusion alarm systems. Electronic card access systems secure all
residence halls and most other campus buildings. Emergency phones and CCTV cameras
are located throughout campus and in most parking lots. Campus Safety personnel work to
maintain a safe and secure campus environment that is conducive to academic, social, and
spiritual growth.
Emergency Operation Plan
The Emergency Operation Plan (EOP) provides a framework for incident preparedness
and emergency response to situations such as fires, bomb threats, and campus evacuations.
The plan describes methods of informing the campus of emergency situations by using a
campus siren, voice/text messaging system, email and an EOP web page accessible via a
link on the College’s website – www.gcc.edu. This EOP web page will provide emergency
updates, fire alarm assembly points, off-campus evacuation points and other related
information. Resident students will also attend an informative emergency response session
as part of the residence hall meetings at the start of each academic year.
Automobiles and Bicycles
Students are not permitted to have automobiles on campus during their freshman year.
Exceptions apply to commuting students and may be made for others in special
circumstances. All students who have automobiles at the College must obtain a permit from

STUDENT LIFE/ 41

the Campus Safety Department for the privilege of keeping cars at the College. Those who
have automobiles are expected to refrain from using them in a manner that would hinder the
student's academic progress and/or contravene College policy. Finally, the College reserves
the right to forbid the possession and use of automobiles in any case where such action is
considered advisable.
Racks for bicycle storage are provided near most living areas. Bicycles may be kept in
residence hall and apartment rooms, provided they do not impede safe entrance to or exit
from the room. Residents who store bicycles in their rooms are expected to respect the space
and needs of their roommate(s). No summer storage for bicycles is available on campus.
(For further detail, see The Crimson student handbook.)

Campus Ministries
The Office of the Dean of the Chapel offers spiritual guidance and direction for the
Grove City College student body through weekly chapel, vespers and alternative chapel
programs, essential times of worship, fellowship and growth. Under the direction of the
Dean of the Chapel, the Campus Ministries team also seeks to aid students in their spiritual
development. Over twenty student ministry groups are coordinated through the Campus
Ministries Office and the staff can assist students in finding the ministry group that best
matches their interests and needs. Staff members may also aid students in finding a local
church that matches their faith tradition or church background. The office coordinates the
annual campus retreat, several all-campus programs and a discipleship program in which
students are matched with mature Christian mentors from the College and/or community.
The Campus Ministries Office also has several resources that students may borrow as they
lead Bible studies and/or seek personal spiritual growth.
College-sponsored domestic and international Inner-City Outreach (ICO) short-term
mission trips are coordinated through the Campus Ministries Office which provides student
leaders with the training, resources, and support necessary to effectively lead such a trip.
Any student interested in leading an ICO trip should speak with the Director of Campus
Ministries to learn more about this process.
Staff members are available to meet with students to talk about issues affecting their
spiritual and personal life and to pray. Please visit the Campus Ministries website to learn
more about the programs and services provided through the Campus Ministries Office.

Health Services
The College maintains a modern Health & Wellness Center staffed by a physician or
physician assistant during regularly scheduled afternoon hours and a team of registered
nurses throughout the day. This health service, designed to treat minor ailments, is available
to all full-time students without cost other than those charged for special services such as
allergy injections.
The College requires a complete medical history, physical exam, and record of
immunizations for each student. Pennsylvania law stipulates that the College must also have
written proof of the meningitis vaccine or a signed waiver indicating decline.
All full-time students attending Grove City College are required to carry health
insurance coverage. For those students not covered under an alternative insurance plan (via
a parent, guardian, etc.), the College offers a Health Insurance Plan for full-time students.
The cost for annual coverage can be found in the Expenses section of the Bulletin.
Counseling services are available through the College’s Counseling Center, also
located in the Zerbe Health and Wellness Center.

Student Disability Services
A disability is defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) as a
substantial limitation of a major life function. Once a student is accepted and has confirmed

42 / STUDENT LIFE

his/her intention to attend Grove City College, he/she must initiate a request for services by
contacting the Disabilities Service Coordinator at DisabilityServices@gcc.edu or (724) 2644673. A student requesting accommodations for a disability is required to submit
documentation of the disability to verify eligibility under the ADA. Reasonable and
appropriate accommodations are determined on a case-by-case basis for qualified students
who have demonstrated a need for these services.

Orientation and Academic Advising
An orientation program is scheduled prior to the start of each semester that is designed
to aid freshmen and transfer students with an easy transition into the College community.
The College also maintains an academic advising program in which each new student
is assigned to a faculty member who acts as advisor. The new student meets his/her advisor
early in the orientation period to discuss matters regarding programs and courses. During
the year, the advisor is available at scheduled office hours for consultation. At the midsemester report period, the advisee's grades are sent to his/her advisor, who may then request
a meeting with the student. This procedure is followed each semester.

Career Services
The mission of the Career Services Office (CSO) is to guide students in their realization
and pursuit of God’s calling for their lives. The CSO provides a wide scope of offerings and
services to our students to support this overriding mission. Students embark on a four-step
career development plan beginning freshman year with self-assessment where they are
encouraged to identify and reflect upon their personality, skills, interests, values and talents
through the use of the resource, PathwayU in addition to the CliftonStrengths assessment.
Following self-assessment, students then move into the phase of career exploration,
followed by career decision making (solidified through experiential opportunities, such as
internships), and finally a strategic job search in the senior year or guidance in the graduate
school admissions process. Through individual career coaching , events and programs, and
career resources, the office assists students in the development of career management skills
they need to succeed in the future, such as networking, interviewing, resume writing, job
and internship searching, among others. In addition, the CSO partners with numerous
employers to post job and internship opportunities for our students through the Handshake
platform, to recruit students at their annual fall Career Fair, and to schedule on-campus and
online recruiting visits to interview students for career opportunities. On-campus and online
recruiting (interviewing) privileges are only available to current students up through the
time they complete their degree at the College. The centralized Career Services Office
works in partnership with Education Career Services which offers specialized career
services for education majors seeking PreK-12 education positions.

Cultural Life
Grove City College hosts many cultural activities on campus, which include renowned
experts in the fields of music, literature, journalism, drama, science, education, national, and
international affairs. It is our hope that these events will serve as a memorable part of our
students’ educational experience.
The College’s Cultural Series features artists of national and international reputation in
music, drama, and dance. Contemporary music groups are also regularly invited to the
campus. Several student dramatic productions; concerts by the Chapel Choir, the Touring
Choir, the College Community Symphony Orchestra, the College Symphonic Band, and the
Jazz Ensemble; and recitals by Orchesis, a student dance ensemble, also take place on a

STUDENT LIFE/ 43

yearly basis. The College also hosts several student and professional art exhibits on campus
each year.
The J. Howard Pew Memorial Lecture; the Albert A. Hopeman, Jr. Memorial Lecture
in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics; the C. S. MacKenzie Integration of Faith and
Learning Memorial Lecture; the J. Paul Sticht Lecture in Business and Ethics; and the
Scholar Lecture Series also bring to campus outstanding speakers in many different fields.

Intercollegiate Athletics
Director of Athletics: Mr. Todd Gibson
All full-time students enrolled at Grove City College who meet the requirements of the
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) are eligible to represent the College on
its varsity athletic teams. The College is a member of the Presidents' Athletic Conference
(PAC), the East Coast Athletic Conference (ECAC) and the National Collegiate Athletic
Association (NCAA). The College adheres to the rules and bylaws of these organizations.
College intercollegiate teams compete in the NCAA Division III. Varsity sports include:
baseball; basketball; cross-country; football; golf; lacrosse; soccer; softball; swimming and
diving; tennis; indoor and outdoor track and field; volleyball; and water polo. Students who
incur absences while representing a recognized College athletic team are excused, without
prejudice to the student, through the Provost’s Office.
Publications
The College owns, funds, and publishes several publications that offer students the
opportunity to develop their journalistic skills, including The Collegian, the weekly campus
newspaper, and The Bridge, the annual yearbook. In addition, The Echo, The Quad, The
Grove City College Journal of Law and Public Policy, and other College publications
provide students with opportunities for creative writing or practical experience.
Student Government
The Student Government Association is composed of approximately thirty members
selected by the student body at a general election each spring. The Association represents
students and confers with the governing bodies of the College on matters pertaining to
campus life and College policies. The Student Government Association is involved in the
general supervision of student activities and is responsible for assisting in all projects for
the betterment of the College.

Student Organizations
More than two hundred student organizations and activities are available on campus,
serving a wide variety of student interests.
• There are more than twenty ministry groups that afford opportunities for Christian
study, fellowship, and service.
• The College offers students a radio station experience through involvement in the
Wolverine Broadcast Network (WBN), a student-operated streaming internet
radio station. This medium provides opportunities for students to develop and
broadcast original programming, participate in the engineering and presentation
of collegiate sports, and produce news and community-affairs feature
programming.
• A variety of musical experiences are provided for both instrumentalists and
vocalists through the marching and concert bands, the symphony orchestra, the
Chapel Choir, and the Touring Choir, which takes an extensive tour each year
during Spring Break.

44 / STUDENT LIFE

•
•

There are eight local sororities and ten local fraternities on campus. Nine
independent social housing groups also serve the interests of male students not
affiliated with a fraternity.
An extensive program of intramural, club sport, and intercollegiate athletics
provides students with a full range of athletic opportunity. Other recreational
organizations offer camping, chess, skiing and a host of other recreational
opportunities.

In addition to twenty-six honor societies, there are twenty-seven departmental and
professional clubs that serve particular academic and career interests. Among the latter are:
Accounting Society. An organization focused on exposing accounting students to the
professional world and current issues related to accounting and business.
American Chemical Society Affiliate. An organization of chemistry students affiliated
with the American Chemical Society.
American Marketing Association. A collegiate chapter of students interested in the field
of marketing.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers. A club open to all mechanical engineering
students.
Business Initiative for Leadership Development. A unique business honorary society
that promotes leadership development and acquaints its members with real-world business
applications.
Exercise Science Club. Providing the Grove City College campus community access
to fitness-based activities in the region while preparing competent entry-level Exercise
Science professionals within the Exercise Science major.
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. A student branch of the I.E.E.E.
open to students carrying at least thirty percent of a normal full-time load in electrical
engineering and allied courses.
The Law Society. An organization comprised of students interested in the field of law.
National Society of Professional Engineers. A national chapter open to all engineering
students.
The Philosophy Club. Providing students with opportunities for critical thinking and
fellowship.
The Pre-Health Society. Seeking to assist students as they prepare for admission to
professional programs in the health field.
Society of Automotive Engineers. A national chapter open to all engineering students.
Society for International Business Affairs. Providing students with a forum for the
discussion and study of various aspects of global business and culture.
Society of Women Engineers. A national organization open to women in engineering
and other related sciences.

Honor Societies
Alpha Kappa Delta. The Alpha Rho Pennsylvania Chapter of The International
Sociology Honor Society.
Alpha Mu Gamma. The Epsilon Pi chapter of a national honor society that recognizes
excellence in the study of foreign languages.
Beta Beta Beta. A national honorary fraternity for biology and molecular biology
majors.
Crown and Sceptre. A sophomore women's honor society that recognizes scholarship,
leadership and service.
Delta Alpha Pi. An international honor society that recognizes high-achieving students
with disabilities.

STUDENT LIFE/ 45

Delta Mu Delta. The Beta chapter of a national honorary business administration
society.
Kappa Delta Pi. An international honor society in education.
Kappa Mu Epsilon. The Pennsylvania Eta Chapter of the national honorary
mathematics society.
Kemikos. A local honorary chemistry society.
Lambda Epsilon Delta. The Gamma chapter of the national honorary for elementary
education majors.
Lambda Iota Tau. The Beta Iota chapter of an honor society that recognizes excellence
in the study of literature.
Mortar Board. The Alpha Theta Mu Chapter of the national honor society that
recognizes senior students who have excelled in scholarship, leadership and service.
Omicron Delta Epsilon. The International Economics Honor Society.
Omicron Delta Kappa. The Beta Mu Circle of the national honor society that
recognizes junior and senior students for scholarship, leadership, and participation in
activities.
Phi Alpha Theta. An international history honorary.
Phi Sigma Tau. A national honorary society for philosophy.
Pi Gamma Mu. The Pennsylvania Alpha chapter of the national honorary social science
society.
Pi Sigma Alpha. The national honorary society for students of political science.
Psi Chi. A national psychology honor society.
The Round Table. A sophomore men's honorary which recognizes scholarship,
leadership and service to the College.
Scroll and Key. Scroll and Key is the highest scholastic honorary award given by the
College to senior students.
Sigma Pi Sigma. A national physics honorary.
Sigma Xi. A scientific honorary society.
Tau Alpha Pi. A local honorary dramatic society.
Theta Alpha Kappa. A national honorary society for religious studies and theology.

Prize Awards
Frances J. Alford Sportsmanship Award, in memory of Frances J. Alford by the Sigma
Theta Chi Sorority, the Women's Athletic Association, and the Class of 1977.
The Crombie Allen Peace Prize, a gift of Crombie Allen, Class of 1895, provides
awards for members of the Pi Gamma Mu who have served the organization well.
The Bechtell Science Award recognizes a senior student from the biological and
physical sciences who is outstanding for his or her creativity and skills in independent
research, communication skills in instruction, and participation in curricular and extracurricular activities within the respective discipline.
The Freshman Biology Achievement Award recognizes a student who has completed
the freshman year and has demonstrated outstanding achievement in the field of biology.
The Senior Biology Award recognizes a senior biology major who shows outstanding
ability in the field of biology.
The Douglas Bockes Memorial Award recognizes a deserving senior English major
who will attend graduate school in the year following graduation.
The Philip N. Carpenter Senior Mathematics Award is given to the outstanding
mathematics major in the graduating class.
The Elinor M. Caruthers Prize, given by Dr. Caruthers, Professor of French, is an
award for excellence in French.

46 / STUDENT LIFE

The Pittsburgh Chapter of Certified Public Accountants Award is given for excellence
in accounting.
The Roger Clark Dawes Professional Engineering Award recognizes the most
outstanding engineering graduate.
The Freshman Math Award is presented by Kappa Mu Epsilon to the students who, at
the conclusion of the freshman year, achieve the highest scores on a competitive
examination.
The Future Leaders in Finance Award is given for excellence in finance.
The J.P. Hassler Prize, an alumnus gift in honor of J.P. Hassler, College Bursar for
more than forty years, is given for the best essay on the topic of Freedom.
The Creig S. Hoyt Award, honoring Creig S. Hoyt, for many years Chair of the
Chemistry Department and Dean of the College, is given to a promising freshman chemistry
student.
The Institute of Management Accountants Award is given to an outstanding accounting
student who has demonstrated superior achievement over his/her college career.
The International Scholarship Award is given to the most outstanding nominee from
Grove City College for a Rhodes, Fulbright or Marshall Scholarship.
The Kappa Delta Pi Award is presented to the outstanding senior who is a member of
Kappa Delta Pi, the secondary education honorary.
The Kemikos Prize is an award for excellence in chemistry.
The Franklin C. Ketler Mathematics Prize, established from the estate of Dr. Franklin
C. Ketler, Jr. is awarded to the graduating senior who has completed at least twenty-eight
credit hours in mathematics and has earned the highest GPA in these courses.
The Lambda Epsilon Delta Award is presented to the outstanding senior who is a
member of Lambda Epsilon Delta, the elementary education honorary.
The Syd McCormick Memorial Award, presented by friends and sisters of Gamma Chi
sorority, recognizes the outstanding senior educator who has shown dedication, excellence,
and enthusiasm in the student teaching experience.
The Morledge, Hodge, Michaelian Christian Servant Award was established through
generous gifts received from friends of Dr. Richard A. Morledge '54, Dean of the Chapel
between 1984 and 1999, in recognition and appreciation of his work in Christian ministry.
The student(s) selected must show obvious evidence of being a servant of Jesus Christ.
The Music Educators National Conference Award, Grove City Collegiate Chapter, for
excellence in academics in the music or music education area.
Edward W. and Sara K. Naegele Scholarship Award, honoring two former chemistry
faculty members, is given to an outstanding science student prior to the senior year.
The Pan Hellenic Sorority Senior Woman Scholastic Award is presented to the senior
sorority member with the highest academic standing.
Phi Alpha Theta History Award, given to a senior for outstanding scholarship and
research in history.
The Grove City College and Pine Instrument Business Plan Competition Awards are
presented to 1st through 3rd place individuals or teams with the best original business plan
for a start-up organization that provides value and service to its shareholders, members and
community.
The Senior Man of the Year and Senior Woman of the Year Awards are presented
jointly by Mortar Board and Omicron Delta Kappa to the senior man and senior woman
who have displayed outstanding scholarship, leadership, and service. It is one of the highest
honors that the College can bestow.
The Robert H. Sisler Award is presented by Alpha Mu Gamma, the national foreign
language honorary, to an outstanding modern language senior in memory of Dr. Sisler,
former professor and GCC graduate.

STUDENT LIFE/ 47

The Swezey/Janicki Scientific Research Award is given annually to a student majoring
in Biology, Chemistry and/or Physics who is determined by the natural science departments
to have conducted the most superior research project.
The James D. Thorne Education Award recognizes two juniors who exhibit
achievement in academics and in Christian service and will be student teaching during the
upcoming year. The award is sponsored by the Fellowship of Christian Educators and Dr.
Thorne. Additional gifts are encouraged.

Confidential Information Policy
Grove City College maintains a number of records containing information about
students and employees. The College respects and recognizes the need for privacy for its
students and employees for much of this information, while at the same time respects and
recognizes the need and desire for information by the parents of its students, and the need
for College employees to have reasonable access to confidential information in order to do
their jobs in an efficient and effective manner. In order to address these concerns, the
College has established a Confidential Information Policy.
In summary, the policy provides that:
• Data related to students and employees will be made available to any College
employee who has a need for that information in order to accomplish his/her job
responsibilities.
• At the discretion of the College, all data regarding a specific student will be made
available, upon request, to that student and to the student’s parents or guardians
upon verification that the person is who he/she claims to be.
• College employees have the right to provide selected student or employee
information to external parties under certain conditions.
• A student’s medical and counseling records shall only be released at the written
request of the student, except as provided by our health provider’s professional
ethics and state and federal laws.
• If, in the professional judgment of the Counseling Center staff, a student is believed
to be a danger to self or others, the Counseling Center staff reserves the right to
contact appropriate college employees (e.g., Vice President for Student Life and
Learning, Assistant Dean of Students, Director of Residence Life, Associate
Director of Residence Life, Residence Directors, Director of Health and Wellness)
and parents to ensure students’ safety while in the process of making appropriate
treatment interventions.
• Students with a valid reason may request that information be withheld from
disclosure to individuals other than College employees. Such request must be in
writing, include the rationale for the request and be provided to the College office
that maintains the identified information. If the request is considered appropriate,
College employees will make every reasonable effort to comply with the student’s
request.
• The College will provide any and all information required by law.

Intellectual Property Policy for Students
Grove City College functions to serve its students and society both by generating and
disseminating knowledge. The College has built and equipped facilities for those purposes,
which are designed to service the needs of students, faculty and staff. Often in the use of
those facilities, intellectual property is created. Intellectual property includes such things as
patentable inventions, copyrightable subject matter, trade secrets and valuable know-how

48 / STUDENT LIFE

and processes (including, but not limited to, computer software), which has potential
commercial, resale or other value.
Those students who matriculate at and attend the College and who use College facilities
or equipment in the development or marketing, in whole or in part, of intellectual property
are expected to share the rights to and proceeds of such property with the College, as further
described below. The College intends this intellectual property policy to apply to every
student and to any and all intellectual property created, enhanced or promoted using College
facilities or equipment, whether as part of ordinary coursework or otherwise in connection
with an activity funded or sponsored by the College in whole or in part. The College
maintains this policy in fairness to all who have contributed to its welfare in the past and as
a way to preserve and improve its facilities for those who will come in the future.
Therefore, if a student of the College uses College facilities or equipment to create,
enhance or promote, in whole or in part, any intellectual property, the following rules shall
apply:
1. Subject to paragraph 6 below, the student shall and hereby does assign all his/her
rights in the intellectual property to the College and shall execute all documents
reasonably requested by the College to affect such assignment. However, if the
intellectual property is patentable and the College has not begun to apply for a
patent within six months after the disclosure of the patentable invention to the
College and the execution of the applicable assignment documents, the College will
permit the author(s)/creator(s) to seek such protection.
2. If a person or entity other than the College promotes and/or markets the intellectual
property in any form, any direct or indirect compensation therefrom, e.g., as a lump
sum payment or continuing royalty, shall, subject to paragraph 4 below, be divided
as follows: 25% to the College 75% to the author(s)/creator(s).
3. If the College promotes and/or markets the intellectual property or manages the
promotion and/or marketing of the intellectual property, any direct or indirect
compensation wherefrom shall be divided as follows: 60% to the College 40% to
the author(s)/creator(s).
4. Before any compensation is paid to the author(s)/creator(s), the College (or other
applicable party) shall be reimbursed for all expenses incurred in developing or
protecting the applicable intellectual property, including (without limitation)
attorney fees and costs for filing and prosecuting a patent application.
5. Notwithstanding the foregoing obligation to compensate the College, if the
author(s)/creator(s) of the intellectual property (a) legally dedicates the intellectual
property to the public before any commercial exploitation occurs, (b) notifies the
College promptly and in writing of the dedication, and (c) provides appropriate
documentation of the dedication, he/she shall have no compensation obligation to
the College.
6. If the intellectual property was created, enhanced, or promoted outside the student's
coursework or otherwise not in connection with an activity funded or sponsored by
the College in whole or in part, such student shall grant the College a perpetual,
nonexclusive, nontransferable, royalty-free license and right to use the intellectual
property for its own purposes.
The foregoing policy shall be disseminated as part of the literature of the College and
shall be deemed part of the rights and obligations to which a student is subject.
If a student intends to use College facilities or equipment outside of the scope of his/her
coursework or on a project not funded or sponsored by the College (and such use is of more
than an incidental nature), he/she shall request permission from the College before such use.

ACADEMIC POLICIES/ 49

ACADEMIC POLICIES
The College offers courses leading to degrees of Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Music,
Bachelor of Science, Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering, Bachelor of Science in
Mechanical Engineering, and Bachelor of Science in Nursing,

General Requirements for Graduation
Candidates for degrees are required to complete the General Education requirements,
the courses required for their chosen major, elective hours to meet the minimum 128 total
hour requirement, and the chapel attendance requirement. Some students may wish to
complete the requirements for a second major or minor. Although this is permitted, the
College does not guarantee course availability or class space to complete a second major or
minor.
At the discretion of the College, seniors may be required to take educational
achievement tests as a condition for graduation.
No credit from other institutions is accepted as applying on the last thirty-two (32)
semester hours for a degree to be granted by Grove City College, except as approved by the
Registrar.
Grove City College awards degrees to all graduates at one annual Commencement
ceremony following completion of the spring semester. A student who completes all
graduation requirements at the end of the fall, winter, intersession, or summer term will
receive his/her diploma at that time. Such students are listed as members of the class of the
year in which they finish; however, they may retain a class reunion year appropriate to their
original cohort. The class rank will include the entire graduating class.

Quality Point Average Requirements for Graduation
Grove City College requires each candidate for graduation to earn a minimum career
quality point average of 2.00 for all coursework completed for the degree. Each student
must also earn a major quality point average of 2.00 for all coursework completed in each
declared major and minor field of study.
Calculating the Career (CQPA) and Major (MQPA) Quality Point Average
The quality point average is calculated by summing both the credit hours attempted and
the quality points earned, then dividing the total quality points by the total hours attempted
and truncating to the second decimal place. Only courses taken at Grove City College are
used to calculate the CQPA and MQPA values. The courses that count for each MQPA are
included with each major’s requirements in the Courses of Instruction section of the
Bulletin. Courses completed within the College's different academic divisions (non-degree
seeking, undergraduate, post-baccalaureate, second degree, and graduate divisions) will be
kept separate for all QPA calculations.
Student Responsibility for Graduation
Although sufficient academic counseling is given through the advising program at
Grove City College, the responsibility for proper registration for each semester rests with
the student. Each student is ultimately responsible for planning his/her program in order to
satisfy graduation requirements.
A student may participate in the College’s May baccalaureate and commencement
ceremonies if, on the day of each event, he/she has a cumulative career quality point average
and major quality point average of at least 2.00 for all coursework completed; has no more
than six (6) unfulfilled chapel requirements; and is able to complete all remaining chapel

50 / ACADEMIC POLICIES

and outstanding course requirements by the end of the subsequent summer term. A student
in this circumstance must submit a “Request to Participate in Commencement” form,
available from the Registrar’s Office, to obtain approval to walk in the College's
commencement ceremony. If approved, the student will be permitted to participate in a
ceremony but will not be considered graduated until all requirements have been met.

Graduation Honors
A student who has completed the final fifty percent of his/her academic work at Grove
City College and meets the cumulative quality point averages stated below is granted his/her
degree with College honors:
3.40 to 3.59 inclusive for College honor "Cum Laude."
3.60 to 3.84 inclusive for College honor "Magna Cum Laude."
3.85 to 4.00 inclusive for College honor "Summa Cum Laude."
Departmental honors in the student's major field of concentration are awarded at
Commencement to any student who has attained the following major quality point average:
3.40 to 3.59 inclusive for Honors in major field.
3.60 to 3.84 inclusive for High Honors in major field.
3.85 to 4.00 inclusive for Highest Honors in major field.
All College and Departmental honors listed in the Commencement program are
unofficial and based upon estimated results. Official College honors will appear on the
diploma, while both College and Departmental honors will appear on the transcript. Final
honors will be based upon all work completed at Grove City College within the degree
earned.

Registration
Registration occurs midway through each semester for the following semester.
Registration for incoming freshmen is completed preceding the students’ entry in the fall.
Students complete the registration process by following procedures on the designated day,
and by paying tuition and other charges. A student who has a balance on his/her student
account or who owes six (6) or more chapel requirements will not be permitted to register
for the next semester until such time his/her account balance is zero or the chapel
requirement is met. Only during the designated registration or drop/add periods can students
enroll, change class schedules, or switch between audit and credit status
Although sufficient academic counseling is given through the advising program at
Grove City College, the responsibility for proper registration for each semester rests with
the student. Each student is ultimately responsible for planning his/her program in order to
satisfy graduation requirements.
A student desiring to complete independent study/research and/or honors courses must
obtain approval from the Faculty Sponsor and the Department Chair, complete the approval
form, and, having secured all required signatures, present the form to the Registrar’s Office
for final approval. Students may take no more than six hours of independent study/research
toward graduation requirements and no more than two independent studies during an
academic year.
A student desiring an internship experience for academic credit must have prior written
approval of the Department Chair of his/her major and the Chair of the department offering
the credit, if different than his/her major.

ACADEMIC POLICIES/ 51

Students are unable to register for 2 or more courses that are scheduled at the same or
have a time overlap. A time conflict exception is permitted when a student audits MUSI
100, 101, 102 provided the conflicting course is coded as a designated lab section.

Course Numbering
Course numbers are arranged to show the year in which the course should be taken.
Prerequisites are implied by the curriculum sequence if not specifically stated. Freshmen
are not permitted to enroll in 400-level courses.
Numbers 101 - 199 are used for freshman courses.
Numbers 201 - 299 are used for sophomore courses.
Numbers 300 and up are used for junior and senior courses.
Numbers 290 or 390 are used for Studies courses.
Numbers 260, 360 and 460 are used for independent studies.
Numbers 270, 370 and 470 are used for independent research projects.
Number 480 is used for internships.
Number 499 is used for honors courses.
The College reserves the right to add or delete courses from the schedule of classes,
change meeting times, change meeting locations, or change instructors at its discretion.

Course Loads
The normal course load for students is fifteen to seventeen (15-17) semester hours.
Each hour over 17 will incur a per-hour fee. All students must have a minimum cumulative
quality point average (CQPA) of at least 3.00 in order to take course loads in excess of
eighteen (18) hours. Students should expect that class assignments will take about two hours
outside of class for every hour of scheduled class time.
Exceptions to the above will be allowed only with permission of the student's advisor,
and in no case shall a student exceed twenty-one (21) semester hours of academic work
(including audit hours). The minimum schedule for any regular full-time student is twelve
(12) semester hours of academic work. Audit credits may not be used in meeting the
minimum of 12.
Eighteen (18) semester hours is the maximum load for freshmen in their first semester
of attendance.
Most courses are three credit hours with class periods on Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday of fifty (50) minutes each or on Tuesday and Thursday of seventy-five (75) minutes
each for fifteen (15) weeks. Laboratory periods with certain courses are from two to three
hours in length.
Laboratory Science Courses
Most laboratory science courses at Grove City College are taught in an integrated
manner in which class lectures and the laboratory experience are interwoven. Therefore,
students should note that most science labs are not separate courses and do not receive
separate individual credit. Rather, laboratory science courses receive credit hours and a
grade as a unit. Students should use caution when enrolling for laboratory science courses
at other institutions. Pre-approval is required for these transfer courses to ensure that any
proposed laboratory science course has an appropriate laboratory or experimental
component and that the number of hours is equivalent to the Grove City College graduation
requirement. Otherwise, courses taken at other institutions may not count toward meeting
the Grove City College general education and/or major requirement.

52 / ACADEMIC POLICIES

Course Fees
Students enrolled in certain courses may be subject to additional fees as described
below. Fees are not necessarily intended to cover the exact cost of the equipment and
materials required for the course, but recognize the additional costs associated with
offering certain courses. For a complete list of fees, please refer to the Expenses and
Financial Aid section. The College reserves the right to update this list prior to the start of
any semester.
Laboratory Materials Fees
Students enrolled in a course with a laboratory component, or those designated as a
stand-alone laboratory course, will actively use equipment and/or expendable materials in
a direct manner to enhance practical skills or understanding a concept.
Music Classes and Lessons Fees
Students enrolled in group music classes or private music lessons will be subject to
additional fees dependent on the course level and hours.
Online Materials Fees
For certain courses, e-books or other online resources will be assigned through a
program called Inclusive Access in addition to or in lieu of physical textbooks. By all
students buying into the program, the cost is reduced for everyone. Information on how to
access the materials is provided by the instructor. The Online Materials Fee varies by
course.
Other Course Fees
Internship, Independent Study, Independent Research, and certain exercise science,
media and arts, and other courses may be subject to individual course fees.

Auditing Courses
Only full-time, undergraduate, students enrolled for at least 12 credit hours may audit
courses with the approval of the instructor and the Registrar. Audit credits may not be used
to meet the minimum of 12 credit hours. The student must register for the course as an
auditor and fulfill class attendance requirements. Upon satisfactory completion of these
requirements, the audited course will be entered on the permanent record using the symbol
"AU" in lieu of a grade. No credit will be awarded for an audited course and students may
not audit a course for which credit was previously earned. The tuition charged for auditing
courses is the same as that charged for credit courses.
Courses may not be changed from credit to audit or from audit to credit after the official
end of the drop/add period. The course will be graded “NG” (No Grade) if attendance
requirements are not satisfied.
Intersession and Online Courses
Grove City College offers a select number of courses (course options vary by
term/year) from various departments in both a concentrated, two-week format during
January and May Intersession and as online courses over the winter and summer breaks.
Intersession courses are taught during the two weeks immediately prior to the opening of
the spring semester and during the two weeks following Commencement. Online courses
are taught during the winter break between the fall and spring semesters and during the
summer break starting as early as the Monday following Commencement. These courses
vary in duration from four to six weeks.
Students wishing to lighten their regular semester loads or who wish to try to graduate
in less than four years will find these intersession and online courses helpful in meeting their

ACADEMIC POLICIES/ 53

goals. The cost for these courses is listed in the Expenses and Financial Aid section of the
Bulletin.
Intersession and online courses are optional and are not counted as part of a student's
regular semester load. Students are cautioned to work closely with their advisors in planning
to take intersession and/or online courses. Course offerings are dependent upon sufficient
enrollment and are subject to cancellation.
The College reserves the right to add or delete courses from the schedule of classes,
change meeting times, change meeting locations, or change instructors at its discretion.

Transfer Credit
College Transfer Credit
Grove City College accepts credits for transfer from any college or university that is
accredited by a regional accrediting body, provided the grade earned is "C" or higher.
Credits for transfer from a non-accredited college or university will be evaluated on an
individual basis, depending on course equivalencies and expected learning outcomes. A
student currently enrolled at Grove City College who wishes to take courses at another
institution for transfer to Grove City must obtain written clearance from the Department
Chair and Registrar before the work is begun. Courses that do not have a letter grade (A, B,
C or P/Pass) will not be accepted. "Satisfactory" grades are not accepted unless the transcript
defines the grade as "C" or higher. Grades for transfer courses do not enter into the
computation of a student's quality point average at Grove City College; however, the credits
earned will count toward the total credits required for graduation.
• Transfer students are subject to the curricular requirements in place for the year in
which they are admitted to Grove City College.
• Once enrolled at Grove City College, the College does not grant credit for any
experience in which a student is paid by the federal government, including ROTC,
Officer’s Candidate School, internships and scientific research.
• At a minimum, 64 credit hours are required to be completed at Grove City College,
as well as a minimum of one half of all credit hours for any major, minor,
certification or concentration.
• Credits for remedial, developmental, and technical courses are not transferable to
Grove City College.
• Credit is not granted for life experience or military service.
• Degree-seeking students may not take courses at other institutions concurrently
with classes at Grove City College.
• Transfer courses that do not equate to a specific Grove City College course may be
granted departmental or general elective credit at the 100-, 200-, 300- or 400- level.
• Quarter-hour credits (two-thirds of a semester hour) taken at an institution on the
quarter hour system will be converted to semester credits at Grove City College
(e.g., 6 quarter hours=4.00 semester hours; 5=3.33; 4=2.67; 3=2.00; 2=1.33; and
1=0.67).
• No credit from other institutions is accepted as applying on the last thirty-two (32)
semester hours for a degree to be granted from Grove City College, except as
approved by the Registrar.
• Freshmen who matriculate with enough Advanced Placement or other college
credits to qualify for a higher-class status will be permitted to change their expected
graduation year and term but will enter as freshmen and progress to sophomore,
junior, and senior class status along with their initial cohort.
• A student who wishes to transfer an internship must meet the internship standards
for a typical Grove City College internship experience. The student should provide

54 / ACADEMIC POLICIES

for evaluation a detailed description about the internship; the company/organization
name; the number of hours worked on-site; a description of the job duties and
academic requirements; and an evaluation report from the supervisor. The
Internship Coordinator of the corresponding Grove City College department will
evaluate these materials to determine if the internship will be approved for transfer,
and, if approved, the number of credits granted.

College Courses Taken in High School
Transfer credit may be awarded for courses that are equivalent or comparable to those
offered by the College and completed with a grade of “C” or better or P/Pass. Any such
courses taken before entering Grove City College must be listed in the catalog of the college
of transfer as courses offered for degree credit to that college’s undergraduates. Individual
college courses taken while in high school will be evaluated on an individual basis,
depending on course equivalencies and expected learning outcomes. Students are
encouraged to earn credit through the AP, CLEP and IB programs, not through College in
the High School programs.
Advanced Placement (AP)
The College may grant academic credit to incoming freshmen who have successfully
completed Advanced Placement (AP) courses and achieved an appropriate score on the
associated AP test. AP tests have been evaluated on an individual basis and the Registrar’s
Office will publish annually a credit equivalency chart listing credits granted for each test
and range of scores. Credit is not given for scores of 1 or 2 and scores sent to Grove City
College must be received directly from the College Board.
Students who receive AP credit in a subject will lose credit at Grove City College if
that same course is repeated here or at another college or university. AP tests taken after
matriculation to Grove City College will not be considered or transferred.
College Level Examination Program (CLEP)
Applicants may also earn academic credit for superior achievement on the College
Level Examination Program (CLEP) on the subject tests given by the College Entrance
Examination Board. CLEP tests have been evaluated on an individual basis and the
Registrar’s Office will publish annually a credit equivalency chart listing credits granted for
each test and range of scores. Scores sent to Grove City College must be received directly
from the College Board Students who receive CLEP credit in a subject will lose credit at
Grove City College if that same course is repeated here or at another college or university.
CLEP tests taken after matriculation to Grove City College will not be considered for
transferred.
International Baccalaureate Program (IB)
Grove City College recognizes the International Baccalaureate as a vigorous college
preparatory program and welcomes applications for admission from all interested students.
Credit is generally awarded for IB Higher Level examinations passed with grades of 5, 6 or
7. No credit is awarded for IB Standard Level examinations. IB credit may be applied to
major programs with the approval of the appropriate academic department but may not be
used to satisfy any of the Humanities course requirements. Students who receive IB credit
in a subject will lose credit at Grove City College if that same course is repeated here or at
another college or university. IB exams taken after matriculation to Grove City College
will not be considered or transferred.

ACADEMIC POLICIES/ 55

Withdrawals
Withdrawal from Individual Courses
• Students may withdraw from any course during the drop/add period without any
record of enrollment in that class on their permanent record.
• For any course dropped after the drop/add period and until the “Last Day to
Withdraw from a Course” deadline, a ‘W’ will be entered on the permanent record
and will not be counted in computing the student's academic average. No refund
will be made for any course dropped after the official add/drop period.
• Courses dropped after the authorized withdrawal period will be marked ‘WF’ and
will be counted as ‘F’ in computing the student's academic average. No course may
be dropped after Study Day.
• Dropping courses at any time during the semester may affect a student’s eligibility
to receive financial aid during the current semester and for future academic
semesters. Students should contact the Financial Aid Office regarding these
matters.
• Grove City College reserves the right to withdraw a student from any course or
from the College.
Withdrawal from the College
If a student finds it necessary to discontinue studies at the College, he/she should notify
the Enrollment Coordinator at (724) 458-2069 to obtain and complete a withdrawal form
for final clearance. If the student is unable to follow this procedure because of illness or
emergency, the College will complete the form, but the student must notify the Enrollment
Coordinator of his/her intent to withdraw. A student who follows the procedure to withdraw
completely from the College will normally receive "W" grades for all current courses;
however, no student will be permitted to withdraw after Study Day. A student who leaves
the College without officially withdrawing will forfeit any refund to which he/she might
otherwise be entitled and may receive grades of "F" or "WF" in all current courses. A student
who has a balance on his/her student account or who owes six (16) or more chapel
requirements will not be issued a transcript, official or unofficial, until such time that his/her
account balance is zero or the chapel requirement is met.
A student withdrawing for medical reasons must provide written documentation from
a physician. Students receiving a medical withdrawal will receive a “W” grade for all
courses.

Readmission
A student wishing to return to Grove City College after withdrawing in an earlier
semester must contact the Enrollment Coordinator at (724) 458-2069 to obtain a "Request
of Former Student to Return" form. In order to be considered for readmission, the student
must have been in good standing at the time of withdrawal. If the student has attended
another school since withdrawing from Grove City College, a record of that work must be
submitted to the Registrar before readmission is considered and/or granted. A readmitted
student who has been absent for more than one year is subject to the curricular requirements
in force at the time of his/her readmission.

Class Standing
A class standing of freshman, sophomore, junior or senior will be assigned to each new,
transfer or returning student at the point of entry or reentry to Grove City College. This
standing will be rolled forward one class level when appropriate by the Registrar's Office.
A student who has completed additional credit hours may request a change in his/her

56 / ACADEMIC POLICIES

expected graduation date but the class standing will not be changed, as students will progress
forward in class standing along with their initial cohort.

Academic Standing
The College expressly reserves the right to dismiss at any time a student whose
academic progress is considered to be unsatisfactory.

Good Academic Standing
Each student must maintain a "C" average (2.00 CQPA) or above to remain in good
academic standing.
Probation and Dismissal Policy
A student falling below a 2.00 CQPA will either be placed on academic probation or
be dismissed from the College. A CQPA of 2.00 or above and an MQPA of less than 2.00
will not result in dismissal; however, a minimum of 2.00 or higher in both is required for
graduation. All dismissal decisions are made at the conclusion of each spring semester, and
the College considers dismissal a permanent status. Specific probation and dismissal criteria
are listed below:
• A student who has earned 35 or fewer local hours from Grove City College (not
including transfer credits) will be placed on probation if his/her CQPA is between
1.50 and 1.99. Dismissal will occur at the conclusion of the spring semester if
his/her CQPA is 1.49 or lower.
• A student who has earned 36 or more local hours from Grove City College (not
including transfer credits) will be placed on probation following any semester
his/her CQPA falls below 2.00. A student already on probation will be dismissed,
at the conclusion of the spring semester, if his/her CQPA is below 2.00.

Attendance Expectations for Students
Grove City College believes that attendance is essential to the satisfactory completion
of the course. If an absence is incurred for any reason, it is the obligation of the student to
ascertain from the instructor what is to be done to maintain his/her standing in that course.
All faculty members are expected to have their absence policies (and the attendant penalties)
stated in writing in their course syllabi, and these policies are to be reviewed with the
students at the first meeting of each course. By unanimous vote of the department chairs
and the College’s Curriculum & Instruction committee, students are not excused to miss
one class to meet the obligations of another.
A student may have unexcused absences which total less than or equal to the number
of times the class meets per week. In other words, classes meeting four times per week allow
four unexcused absences; three times per week allow three unexcused absences, etc. If an
unexcused absence occurs on a test or laboratory day, or when an assignment is due, it will
be left to the discretion of the professor as to whether the work may be made up.

Excused Absences
The Provost’s Office may excuse absences falling under the following categories. The
decision to excuse an absence is solely the discretion of the Provost’s Office or one of its
designees.
• Authorized College activities: Representing the College at college-authorized
events are excused by the Provost’s Office or one of its two designees—the Athletic
Department and the Career Services Office. The Athletic Department issues
excused absences for varsity athletes participating in sporting events. The Career
Services Office excuses absences for seniors in the cases of post-graduation job

ACADEMIC POLICIES/ 57

interviews and graduate, medical, law, and other professional school admission
interviews, as well as for students scheduling internship interviews with potential
employers.
• Military: Students who are active members of the military who are ordered to
participate in a military related event are responsible for notifying their professors
and the Office of the Provost at provostoffice@gcc.edu.
• Court Summons: Student who receive a jury duty order or a court appearance
summons are responsible for notifying their professors and the Office of the Provost
at provostoffice@gcc.edu.
• Loss of immediate family member: Students are responsible for notifying their
professors and the Office of Student Life and Learning at studentlife@gcc.edu
when there is a death of an immediate family member.
• Illness/Injury: In the event of illness or injury, students are to report to the Zerbe
Health and Wellness Center for treatment. If the illness or injury results in a class
or classes being missed, it is the student’s responsibility to notify the instructor and
make arrangements for an excuse from class and for make-up work. If it is
determined, after examination at the Zerbe Health and Wellness Center, that the
illness/injury prevents class attendance or requires the student to be confined, a
representative of the Zerbe Health and Wellness Center will issue a medical reason
for absence which the student can present to the instructor. Non-resident students
whose illness does not necessitate a visit to the Zerbe Health and Wellness Center
must notify their professors. The non-resident student’s own health provider may
issue a medical reason for absence which the student can present to the instructor.
• Emergency: In case of an emergency such as hospitalization, the Office of Student
Life and Learning should be contacted prior to 5:00 p.m. at (724) 458-2700 or the
College Operator after 5:00 p.m. at (724) 458-2000. Students must make up the
work for the classes missed so that absences are without prejudice in determining
a grade on the missed work.
Students must make up the work for any classes missed so that absences are without
prejudice in determining a grade on missed work. Students will be given reasonable
opportunity to make up any graded assignments, including exams and quizzes, missed as a
result of an excused absences.

Unexcused Absences
Absences incurred due to disciplinary sanctions are reported to faculty via the Office
of Student Life and Learning. Through formal action, the faculty has agreed that students
who miss classes due to such sanctions are not permitted to make up any missed academic
work, whether prior to, during, or after the stated period of suspension.
The College reserves the right to withdraw a student from any course in which the
student misses 25% or more of the scheduled class meetings for unexcused reasons. A
faculty member who encounters such a situation must alert the Provost; the Provost, in
consultation with the faculty member and Deans, will evaluate the situation and make the
final decision regarding the student’s withdrawal. When a student must be withdrawn from
a course under such circumstances, the Provost will also determine whether the student’s
final course grade will be entered as a “W” (Withdrawn) or “WF” (Withdrawn Failing).
Note: This withdrawal policy is not intended to replace the individual faculty member’s own
class attendance policy (with attendant penalties), nor to contradict the rest of the guideline
outlined in this section, but will apply only according to the circumstances and procedure
described above.
Absences other than those which are excused by the Provost’s Office above will be
handled at the discretion of the professor whose class is missed.

58 / ACADEMIC POLICIES

In summary, students are always encouraged to contact their professors and the
appropriate office regarding any class absences and should do so prior to the absence
whenever possible. Lists of such excused absences are sent to each professor, who must
then excuse the absence on his/her record without prejudice to the student. Excused
absences from any class or laboratory do not excuse a student from any work required in
the course.

Study Day
The purpose of the College’s Study Day is to provide students the opportunity to
prepare for the start of finals week, which begins later that evening. Therefore, no testing,
presentations, laboratory experiences, exams or other graded experiences may be scheduled
on Study Day except for those exams officially scheduled by the Registrar’s Office during
the final exam period at 6:00 p.m. Furthermore, all course assignments must be completed
and submitted by the conclusion of the last scheduled class period prior to the College’s
official Study Day.
Final Examinations
Final examinations, according to College policy, are required of all classes and are to
be administered during the time scheduled by the Registrar. Final examination times may
not be changed to suit the convenience of either instructor or students. The final examination
schedule issued by the Registrar is, therefore, to be followed. It is the responsibility of the
students to review the final exam schedule at the beginning of the semester and adjust their
travel and work plans accordingly. Students scheduled for 3 or more exams in one day may
request permission from the Dean of the school of the student’s first major to reschedule
one exam.
Students with a Provost’s Office excused absence, as set forth in ‘Attendance
Expectations for Students’, will receive permission to reschedule their final exam. Students
who receive a Provost’s Office excused absence should notify their professor as early as
possible to discuss options for rescheduling the exam.
Repeat Courses
A student may repeat a course in which he/she previously earned a grade of ‘C-’ or
lower. A student who passes a course with a ‘C’ grade or higher may not later repeat the
same class for credit or audit unless the course is designated as repeatable for multiple
credits, such as Music 100 – Band.
A student who earns a ‘F’ (fail) or ‘WF’ (withdrawal fail) in the same course three
times will not be permitted to take the course again or receive transfer credit for that course,
unless that course is specifically required for all GCC students. If the course is required for
a student’s current declared major, the student will be required to switch to a major that does
not require that course; academic advisors can help the student select a new major.
Exceptional circumstances beyond a student’s control may be taken into consideration by
the Department Chair and college administration.
In the case of a repeated course, only the most recent occurrence of the repeated class
will be used in the calculation of the grade point average and count toward hours earned,
regardless if the grade is higher or lower than the original grade earned.
A student that repeats a course at an outside institution and transfers that credit to Grove
City College the transfer of the grade and course is subject to the transfer credit policy and
the repeat course policy regarding earned grade.

ACADEMIC POLICIES/ 59

Grade Values
The grade values are as follows: A, Excellent; B, Good; C, Satisfactory; D, Poor; F,
Failure; W, Withdrawn; WF, Withdrawn Failing; I, Incomplete; and AU, Audit.
Grades have the following quality point numerical equivalencies:
A+/A = 4.00, A- = 3.67, B+ = 3.33, B = 3.00, B- = 2.67, C+ = 2.33, C = 2.00, C- = 1.67,
D+ = 1.33, D = 1.00, D- = 0.67, F = 0.

Grade Point Average
The grade point average is computed by dividing the number of semester hours
attempted at Grove City College into the total number of quality points earned at the
College, including those for failed and/or repeated courses. In the case of a repeated course,
only the most recent occurrence of the repeated class will be used in the calculation and
count toward hours earned. No student may receive credit for the same course twice, unless
the course is designated as repeatable for multiple credits, such as Music 100—Band.
Incomplete Grade
A grade of Incomplete (‘I’) is issued only when a student, through no fault of his/her
own, is unable to complete his/her work. The student must complete the work for this course
by Study Day of the following semester or the ‘I’ becomes an ‘F’, even if he/she is no longer
enrolled at the College. When the student completes the required work, the faculty member
will report the grade earned to the Registrar.
A grade of ‘I’ may impact a student’s eligibility to receive scholarships, grants or loans
until the work is completed. The student should contact the Financial Aid Office for
clarification.
Honors Courses
All honors courses are designated with course number 498 or 499. Students must
submit the “Honors Study” form available at www2.gcc.edu/registrar to register for an
honors course. Grades of ‘A’ or ‘B’ are required for credit in honors courses. Failure to earn
an ‘A’ or ‘B’ grade will result in a grade of ‘F’.
Dean’s List
A Dean's List is published at the end of each semester naming students who earned
academic honors for that semester:
3.40 to 3.59 inclusive for Dean's List.
3.60 to 3.84 inclusive for Dean's List with Distinction.
3.85 to 4.00 inclusive for Dean's List with High Distinction.
Grade Appeals
A student who believes a course’s final grade was determined unfairly may appeal. The
student handbook, The Crimson, provides specific details regarding the grade appeal
process.
Transcripts
Grove City College partners with the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) to provide
online ordering of transcripts. Current or former students wishing to order an official
transcript may visit the Registrar’s webpage (www.gcc.edu/registrar) to access the link to
the transcript ordering website (processing time is typically between 3-5 business
days). Orders placed for official transcripts to be delivered via mail are $5.50 per
transcript (includes plus a $2.50 service fee per delivery address) and are delivered via
first class mail through the U.S. Postal Service. Transcripts to be delivered via electronic

60 / ACADEMIC POLICIES

PDF are $7.25 for one transcript to one email address (includes $1.75 electronic fee from
NSC) and must be ordered online through the NSC.
A student who has a balance on his/her student account or who owes six (6) or more
chapel requirements will not be issued a transcript until such time his/her account balance
is zero or the chapel requirement is met.

Academic Integrity
Grove City College is deeply invested in upholding academic integrity and
honesty. Three of the college’s five core values, faithfulness, excellence, and community,
directly relate to academic integrity because any violation of academic integrity is a form
of theft and deceit that affects the one stolen from, as well as the community of students and
faculty at the college. In addition, cheating is a violation of three of the Ten
Commandments: the prohibitions against stealing, lying, and coveting. However, as the
Ten Commandments and the totality of Scripture demonstrate to us, we are fallen creatures
who at times do what we ought not do.
Accordingly, the college has created a policy both to define what cheating is and to
describe our process for dealing with allegations of cheating in order to discourage cheating
and provide an opportunity for meaningful repentance and restoration when students do
cheat.

Pledge
As a student of Grove City College, I pledge to do my work faithfully with honesty in
accordance with my calling as a student working for Christ’s glory.
Cheating and Plagiarism may be present in many areas, including (but not limited to)
the following:
1. Completing Papers, Outside Work. Work done out of class, which a student
submits as his/her own work to a professor, should be his/her own and should not
contain that which has been obtained from another, other than properly credited
references, sources, and citations.
2. Taking Exams, Tests, Quizzes. Work done on a test, exam, or quiz, which a student
submits to a professor, should be his/her own and should not contain that which has
been knowingly obtained from another. By default, no resources are permitted
unless explicitly allowed by the instructor.
3. Preparing for Exams. A student should not seek to gain an advantage on an exam
he/she is about to take by obtaining advanced access to particular questions or
advance copies of a professor's exam, or by giving access to other students. This
includes access to exams from prior semesters.
4. Group Work. In courses where group work or teamwork is allowed, the members
of the group may collaborate and share resources among themselves, but not with
other groups or prior and subsequent classes.
5. A student should not cooperate with, aid, or encourage another student’s violation
of the above rules, even though he or she receives no direct benefit. Any student
who does so is also guilty of cheating and can have their grade from current or past
semesters (if relevant) reduced.
6. Instructor-Imposed Limitations. Faculty may add (via syllabus, assignment
instructions, or verbal instructions) additional rules and limitations pertaining to
cheating in their particular discipline, class, and assignment.
Special Note: Plagiarism Includes
1. Any direct quotation of another’s words, from simple phrasing to longer passages,
without using quotation marks and properly citing the source of those words.

ACADEMIC POLICIES/ 61

2. Any summary or paraphrase of another’s ideas without properly citing the source
of those ideas.
3. Any information that is not common knowledge—including facts, statistics,
graphics, drawings—without proper citation of sources.
4. Any cutting and pasting of verbal or graphic materials from another source and
representing as one’s own work—including books, databases, web sites, journals,
newspapers, etc.—without the proper citation for each of the sources of those
materials; this includes any copyrighted artwork, graphics, or photography
downloaded from the Internet without proper citation.
5. Any wholesale “borrowing,” theft, or purchasing of another’s work and presenting
it as one’s own, whether from the Internet or from another source.
6. Any presentation of “ghost-written” work including—whether paid for or not—as
one’s own original work, including papers, computer code, visual artwork, and
other forms of written and non-written work.
7. Making one’s work available for copying by others, as well as copying work posted
on the Internet or otherwise made available by another.
8. Self-citation: you cannot submit the same work for two different classes. If you
use part of an earlier work, or ideas from an earlier work, you should reference it,
as with any other source.
The Process: How the Honesty in Learning Policy Works
Reporting a Violation
1. If a student, staff, faculty, or administrator believes he or she observed a violation
of the Academic Integrity Policy, he or she must fill out an online report of the
violation via myGCC, which is sent both to the professor of that course and the
Chair of the Student-Faculty Review Committee (SFRC). This report should be
filed within two class days of discovering the alleged violation.
2. The professor of the course may then meet with the student(s) who allegedly
committed the violation. If the report was submitted by someone other than the
professor, the professor may also meet separately with that person.
a. If the professor determines no violation has occurred, he or she will
submit a resolution to the Chair of the SFRC and the matter will be
dropped.
b. If the professor believes the policy has been violated, he or she will
submit a resolution to the Chair with a proposed sanction (which must
be at least a failing grade on the assignment and can include up to failure
in the course, depending on the severity of the incident).
3. The SFRC Chair will then contact via e-mail the student(s) who have allegedly
violated the policy and inform them of the professor’s proposed sanction and of
their right to either accept the charge and sanction or challenge it. The student(s)
must respond to the SFRC Chair within three class days, or the student(s) accept
the penalty by default.
a. If the student(s) accept the charge, the Chair will present the case to the SFRC
Committee, which issues the penalty. The SFRC Committee may alter the
recommended sanction. The Provost’s Office will record the sanction.
b. If the student(s) reject the charge, the Chair will schedule a contested hearing,
where the SFRC will hear from all involved parties and make a determination
on the case. The SFRC Committee may alter the recommended sanction. The
standard of evidence for the committee is “the preponderance of the
evidence.”

62 / ACADEMIC POLICIES

Note on the SFRC Committee: The committee is made up of approximately 20 students,
annually elected to one-year terms, and 30 faculty, who are elected to two-year terms. The
SFRC Chair selects five students and five faculty from that pool to address each case.
Decisions require a supermajority of 70% of the votes.
c. The SFRC chair will inform the students of the SFRC decision within two
class days.
d. After a contested hearing, either party may appeal, via e-mail, the Committee’s
decision to the Dean of the school in which the alleged violation occurred
within two class days. Students may not appeal the SFRC sanction if they
accepted the charge of violating academic integrity.
e. The Dean will meet with the student(s), faculty member, and SFRC chair
(separately) before ruling. The Dean’s decision is final.
f. Once the final decision has been rendered and any appeal is exhausted the
sanction will be applied and the Provost’s Office will record the sanction.
g. If the student(s) has been involved in two or more violations of the Honesty in
Learning policy, the Provost may apply additional sanctions up to and
including academic dismissal.
The SFRC Chair will make a concerted effort to conclude the whole process for each
case within 30 class days (not counting appeals) but cannot guarantee this timeline. In
addition, on occasion allegations of violations of academic integrity come up at the end of
the semester, when it is not possible for the committee to meet. In those instances, the
committee will resolve the case at the beginning of the next academic semester, or in the
case of a graduating student, with a reduced committee. There is no statute of limitations
on cheating.

Information Technology
Grove City College strives to be a leader in the use of information technology in higher
education. A number of technical services are provided to the campus community to help
facilitate teaching and learning.

Grove City College E-mail Accounts
Each student is provided a Grove City College e-mail account. The purpose of this
account is to facilitate communication between students, professors, and other student
support services. It is essential for each student to maintain his/her account since important
campus communications are sent only by this means.
Campus Portal
Each student is also provided access to the College’s campus portal - myGCC. The
campus portal enables students to review campus news, search on-line for course schedules,
register for classes, review financial accounts, obtain unofficial transcripts, and more. Midterm and final grades are also posted via the campus portal.
On-Line Course Management Systems
Many professors use course management systems for posting course syllabi,
assignments, grades, and other relevant information. Students will be provided with
appropriate user accounts, and professors will notify students if they are using a course
management system for a specific course.

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 63

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE
PROGRAMS
Since its founding in 1876, Grove City College, committed to Christian principles, has
sought to provide liberal and professional education of the highest caliber. Long recognized
for its academic quality, Grove City College insists that all its graduates possess, in addition
to specialized knowledge in major or professional fields, a high level of cultural literacy and
communication skills. Students are required to complete forty-four (44) credit hours of
general education courses with emphasis in the humanities; science, faith, and technology;
social sciences; quantitative and logical reasoning; laboratory sciences; and foreign
language. This program of studies in a broad range of liberal arts and sciences, consistent
with many national recommendations for excellence, helps to ensure that Grove City
College graduates have the marks of educated persons, whatever their profession.

General Education Requirements
BA and BS
BM, BS, BSEE,
(non-science) and BSME (science)
Humanities Core (Civilization Series)
Writing Requirement
Science, Faith, and Technology
Foundations of the Social Sciences
Quantitative/Logical Reasoning
Natural Sciences (with laboratories)
Healthful Living
Foreign Language

15 hours
3 hours
2 hours
3 hours
6 hours
8 hours
1 hour
6 hours
44 hours

15 hours
3 hours
2 hours
3 hours
6 hours
8 hours
1 hour
0 hours
38 hours

NOTE: In many cases, courses that students take to satisfy the requirements for a major
will also satisfy general education requirements. For example, engineering students are
already required to take more than the minimum natural science courses, and business
program students already take math and statistics courses. Students are required to fulfill
the total credit hours in both general education and major requirements (minimum 128).
Each student is required to fulfill the general education and major-specific
requirements listed in the Grove City College Bulletin for the year in which the
student matriculates to the College as a full-time freshman, or in the case of a transfer
student, the year initial year of transfer to the College. If a student withdraws from the
College and returns within one year, the student may continue to follow the original Bulletin
requirements. However, if a student is away from the College for over one year, the student
must follow the requirements listed in the Bulletin for the year of return to the College. A
student may choose to follow the requirements of a later Bulletin, but is required to fulfill
both the major and general education requirements outlined and required in that Bulletin
edition.

WRITING INTENSIVE (WI) / SPEAKING INTENSIVE (SI) /
INFORMATION LITERACY (IL) STUDIES
Recognizing that an essential component of academic preparation and lifelong learning
consists of the ability to locate, evaluate, and present information, the College requires all

64 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

students to complete a sequence of courses that provide instruction in information literacy,
writing, and speaking.
The Writing Intensive/Information Literacy (WI/IL) expectations are met through two
curriculum tracks which are designed to provide a general across-the-curriculum
introduction plus additional major-specific instruction. First, a foundation is laid for all
students through our general education curriculum. WRIT 101 initiates students into
Information Literacy through general library, database, and internet use. Humanities 102
“Civilization and the Biblical Revelation” focuses on course specific instruction.
Building upon the general instruction received through the Civilization Series, each
department provides discipline-specific instruction to its majors either within a single course
or across several courses, concluding in a research paper and frequently an oral presentation.
Students receive exposure to major databases, library resources, internet resources, and
scholarly research techniques employed by professionals.
The Speaking Intensive (SI) component of our General Education curriculum is
fulfilled through major related courses where students learn both basic and advanced public
speaking skills.

CIVILIZATION SERIES
The Civilization Series, also called the “Humanities Core” (HUMA), discusses the
origins, merit, and influence of history’s most decisive ideas, literary works, and artistic
products in five three-credit hour courses. Students study the leading thinkers, books, and
ideas in religion, philosophy, history, political science, economics, literature, art, and music.
Reflecting the vision of the founders of Grove City College, these five courses encourage
intellectual, moral, spiritual, and social development grounded in Christian ideas of truth,
morality, and freedom. Although these 15 hours in the humanities examine many different
points of view and consider other nations and cultures, they emphasize America’s religious,
political, and economic heritage of individual freedom and responsibility and their part in
the development of Western civilization.
HUMA 102. CIVILIZATION AND THE BIBLICAL REVELATION. A study of
Christian revelation and how it influenced the course of Western civilization. It focuses on
key texts that are foundational for theology, cosmology, epistemology, human nature,
society, and ethics. This course contains the second component of the across-the-curriculum
Information Literacy (IL) requirement. The year-long course sequence of Religion 211 and
212 may substitute for this course. Similar courses taken at other institutions will transfer
as elective credit and may not be used to fulfill this requirement.
Semester course, three hours.
HUMA 200. WESTERN CIVILIZATION: HISTORICAL AND INTELLECTUAL
FOUNDATIONS. This course explores the intellectual, cultural, political, and religious
foundations of Western Civilization from the ancient Greeks to the modern world, with
special emphasis on great thinkers, crucial events, and significant ideas. Prerequisites:
Writing 101 and Humanities 102. Students substituting Religion 211 and 212 for
Humanities 102 must take either Religion 211 or Religion 212 as a prerequisite for this
course.
Semester course, three hours.
HUMA 202. CIVILIZATION AND LITERATURE. A study of great works of literature
that represent the major periods in the history of Western civilization. The course explores
the nature of God and humanity, the nature of good and evil, the meaning of moral choice,
the purpose of life, and the meaning of salvation.
Semester course, three hours.

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 65

HUMA 301. CIVILIZATION AND THE ARTS. An examination of outstanding works
of visual art and music that represent the major periods in the history of Western civilization.
The course examines the nature of God, the ways people have expressed their understanding
of God’s nature in the arts, the ways people have seen themselves throughout Western
history, and the purpose of life.
Semester course, three hours.
HUMA 303. CHRISTIANITY AND CIVILIZATION: MODERN AND
POSTMODERN CHALLENGES. An examination of the theological and philosophical
underpinnings of Christianity, historical and contemporary challenges to Christianity,
resources for developing Christian responses to these challenges, and the enduring relevance
of the Christian vision of the good life to contemporary life, including vocation. This course
is the Humanities capstone. Similar courses taken at other institutions will transfer as
elective credit and may not be used to fulfill this requirement. Prerequisites: Humanities
200; and Humanities 202 or 301.
Semester course, three hours.

WRITING REQUIREMENT
Foundations of Academic Discourse introduces students to the fundamentals of
academic writing. Students explore informative, analytical, evaluative, and persuasive
writing, learning how to develop their writing using various rhetorical strategies. The course
also introduces students to the basics of critical thinking, providing opportunities for
students to discover ways in which good thinking produces good writing and how writing
is itself a mode of thinking. Students develop a practical understanding of writing as a
process, and they develop productive writing strategies that can be adapted to various
academic and professional writing contexts. In preparation for research writing required in
many other courses, this course introduces students to the fundamentals of information
literacy.
WRIT 101. FOUNDATIONS OF ACADEMIC DISCOURSE. A course introducing
students to the fundamentals of college composition. Topics include the writing process,
rhetorical strategies, basics of critical reading and thinking, and key forms of writing such
as informative, evaluative, argumentative, and synthesis. This course serves as a foundation
to prepare students to succeed in other academic writing contexts. This course contains the
Information Literacy (IL) requirement.
Semester course, three hours.

STUDIES IN SCIENCE, FAITH, AND TECHNOLOGY (SSFT)
Among other things, courses in this category explore the relationship between science
and religion, technology and faith, technology and ethics, the guidance which ethical
analysis brings to scientific and technological endeavors, and the basic presuppositions and
underpinnings of science and Christian faith. All students must take one course from the
following choices:
COMP 205 or SSFT 205—Ethics, Faith, and the Conscious Mind
PHIL 243—Science and the Human Inquiry, Design and the Person
SSFT 210—Science and Religion
SSFT 212—Science, Faith, and Technology
Most Arts and Letters majors, as well as Mathematics and Computer Science majors
should complete the SSFT requirement by the end of the sophomore year. Biology,
Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, and Entrepreneurship majors should complete the SSFT
requirement by the end of the junior year.

66 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

COMP 205 / SSFT 205. ETHICS, FAITH, AND THE CONSCIOUS MIND. This course
focuses on three components of ethics, faith, and philosophy from a computer science
perspective. First, it examines the Christian theological and philosophical foundations of
science and the ethical role of computer science in areas such as globalization, autonomous
systems, and intellectual property. Second, it considers perspectives on the origins, nature,
and future of human cognition and consciousness, including intersections of artificial
intelligence and consciousness. Third, it reviews ethical systems, cyberethical professional
codes, ethical problem-solving techniques, and specific ethical cases, again from a computer
science perspective and building on an informed Christian response to technology. Students
may only receive credit for one of Science, Faith, & Technology 205 or Computer Science
205. Prerequisites: Humanities 102 (or Religion 211 and 212); and a lab science. The lab
science may be taken concurrently with this course.
Spring semester only, three hours.
PHIL 243. SCIENCE AND THE HUMAN: INQUIRY, DESIGN AND THE PERSON.
This course will examine historical and contemporary discussions of the nature of scientific
inquiry and scientific knowledge, and related questions in the philosophy of science. It will
also examine philosophical issues connected with design in nature, origins, and current
technological development.
Semester course, three hours.
SSFT 210. SCIENCE AND RELIGION. A study of fundamental themes in science and
religion and important issues that emerge from the science and religion interface (e.g., issues
from cosmology, Darwinism and evolutionary theory, and the neurosciences). The course
will provide an opportunity to study the two perspectives of science and religion and
investigate ways in which these apparently separate approaches might be connected.
Prerequisites: Humanities 102 (or Religion 211 and 212); and a lab science. The lab science
may be taken concurrently with this course.
Semester course, two hours.
SSFT 212. SCIENCE, FAITH, AND TECHNOLOGY. This course is designed to give a
theological, philosophical, and historical rationale for why Christians do science. What
science is, how and why it developed in the context of Western Christianity, and how
Christians are to respond to scientific information and theory will be considered. Particular
emphasis will be given to biblical and scientific perspectives on the origin of the universe,
the origin of organic life, and human origins. Selected topics in modern science and
technology, such as cloning, stem cell research, chimeras, cosmology, quantum physics, and
artificial intelligence, will also be addressed. Prerequisites: Humanities 102 (or Religion
211 and 212); and a lab science. The lab science may be taken concurrently with this course.
Semester course, two hours.

FOUNDATIONS OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
All students are required to choose one course from the following:
• Economics 120—Foundations of Economics
• History 120—Foundations of History
• History 141—World Geography
• History 204—Historical and Philosophical Foundations of Education
• Political Science 101—Foundations of Political Science
• Psychology 101—Foundations of Psychological Science
• Psychology 200—Cross-Cultural Psychology
• Social Work 101—Foundations of Social Work
• Sociology 101—Foundations of Sociology
• Sociology 103—Foundations of Cultural Anthropology

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 67

All ten foundations courses, in addition to providing overviews of their respective
fields, are fashioned to give each Grove City College graduate a distinctive stamp, for they
embrace a strong Christian worldview and provide a grounding in critical analysis of the
questions and issues that have animated Western thought as applied to each specific field of
study.
Similar courses taken at other institutions may transfer as elective credit but, in most
cases, will not fulfill the Foundations requirement, with two exceptions. Courses approved
to transfer as either Psychology 101 or Sociology 101 will fulfill the Foundations
requirement if the student also completes, at Grove City College, one of the associated 1credit classes listed below:
PSYC 105—Perspectives on Psychology (if transferring Psychology 101)
SOCI 105—Perspectives on Sociology (if transferring Sociology 101)

QUANTITATIVE/LOGICAL REASONING
All students are required to take a total of six hours from any of the courses listed
below.
• Any courses with the MATH prefix, except MATH 110.
• One course from:
Statistics 131-Statistical Methods I*
Psychology 201—Statistical Methods*
*Students may not receive earned credit for both Statistics 131 and Psychology
201.
• One course from:
Computer 141—Computer Programming I
Music 103—Music Theory I
Philosophy 201—Symbolic Logic
Philosophy 211—General Logic

NATURAL SCIENCES (with laboratories) (SCIC)
The Natural Science requirement, which must be completed by the end of the junior
year, must be fulfilled by taking eight hours of lab science courses by any one of the
following methods:
• Two four-credit lab science courses offered by the Departments of Biology,
Chemistry, or Physics.
• Science 201; and one of Science 202, 203, or 204
• Science 202; and one of Science 201 or 203
• Science 203; and one of Science 201, 202, or 204
• Science 204; and one of Science 201 or 203
• Science 201; and a four-credit Biology (BIOL) or Chemistry (CHEM) lab course
• Science 202; and a four-credit Chemistry (CHEM) or Physics (PHYS) lab course
• Science 203; and a four-credit Biology (BIOL) or Physics (PHYS) lab course
• Science 204; and a four-credit Chemistry (CHEM) or Physics (PHYS) lab course
Note: A student may not fulfill this requirement by taking SCIC 202 and 204.
SCIC 201. FUNDAMENTALS OF THE UNIVERSE. This course covers major ideas
concerning the physical universe, including applications of those ideas, past and present.
Coverage includes philosophy of science, motion, energy, electricity, light, and other
selected topics and applications. No credit will be given to students who have already

68 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

received credit for Physics 101 or 121. This course is designed to meet general education
science requirements for liberal arts students. Three lectures and one lab per week.
Semester course, four hours.
SCIC 202. LIFE SCIENCE. This course discusses the contribution of a scientific approach
to our understanding of life, with a focus on fundamental ideas and their historical
development and impact on society. Topics include aspects of molecular, genetic, cellular,
organismal, and population biology. No credit will be given to students who have already
received credit for Biology 101. This course is designed to meet general education science
requirements for liberal arts students. Three lectures and one lab per week.
Semester course, four hours.
SCIC 203. ATOMS, MOLECULES AND THE MATERIAL WORLD. This course is
designed to make chemistry accessible to anyone with the desire to understand the chemical
world in which we live. A strong emphasis on chemical reactions as well as on the basic
theoretical principles that underlie chemistry are presented. An integral part of this course
is the development of problem-solving skills. No credit will be given to students who have
already received credit for Chemistry 111. This course is designed to meet general
education science requirements for liberal arts students. Three lectures and one lab per week.
Semester course, four hours.
SCIC 204. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE. This course gives emphasis to a scientific
approach to environmental awareness including contributions from ecology, biology,
geology and chemistry. Historical worldviews that impact attitudes, ethics, and policies
toward the environment will be discussed. The consequences of environmental pollution
and strategies for resource management will be explored with particular attention to policies
that impact future sustainability of our planet. The laboratory will include both field and lab
hands-on experiences. This course is designed to meet general-education science
requirements for liberal arts majors. Three lectures and one lab per week.
Semester course, four hours.

HEALTHFUL LIVING
PHYE 100 Healthful Living is a required course that all freshmen and transfer students
will take in their first year at Grove City College. It is an 8-week course offered online
during the fall and spring semesters. Current evidence and best practices will be presented
by Grove City College’s Exercise Science faculty and the Counseling Center’s staff.
PHYE 100. HEALTHFUL LIVING. This course introduces students to fundamental
concepts associated with healthful living throughout the lifespan in modern society. The
course will focus upon the promotion of health and wellness within individuals, families,
and communities through an understanding of healthful living, development of healthy
lifestyles, and avoiding or overcoming harmful habits. Current research and best practices
will be presented to further students’ knowledge and help them to shape their own strategies
for a healthy and fit future.
Semester course, online only, one hour.

FOREIGN LANGUAGE
Grove City College believes the foreign language requirement helps promote a high
level of cultural literacy and communication skills that are necessary for students to be
competitive in our world and to lead and serve in a global context.
All B.A. graduates and non-science B.S. graduates are required to complete at least the
second-year course sequence (201-202 courses) in a foreign language. Students should plan

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 69

to begin fulfillment of this requirement in the fall of their freshman year, choosing one of
the following options:
1. Completing the 201-202 level courses in a modern, widely spoken foreign
language such as French or Spanish.
2. Completing the 201-202 level courses in a classical written language, such as Latin
(offered infrequently), New Testament Greek, and Biblical Hebrew, plus an
additional six credit hours from the following international culture courses:
• Communication Arts 225—Intercultural Communication or Global Studies
300—International Manners and Mores
• English 205—World Literature I or 206—World Literature II
• Global Studies 310—Chicano/Latin American Literature (taught in English)
• Music 330—World Music: A Selective Survey of Non-Western Music
• Political Science 341—African Politics, 342—Middle Eastern Politics, or
344—Asian Politics
• Psychology 200—Cross-Cultural Psychology
• Sociology 103—Cultural Anthropology
• Completing the 101-102 level course sequence in the same modern, widely
spoken foreign language, such as French or Spanish.
The standard for determining the foreign language course needs for each student is
based on the following:
• Three years in high school of a modern, widely spoken language:
Students who have studied three years of the same modern, widely spoken foreign
language in high school with a "B" average or better will be exempt from further
language requirements.
• Less than three years in high school of a modern, widely spoken language:
Students who have studied less than three years of a modern, widely spoken foreign
language in high school or completed three years with less than a ‘B’ average will
need to take the language placement exam. Exam information can be found on the
Modern Language department’s website. The exam will determine placement into a
course in the language sequence (101, 102, 201 or 202) based on the student’s
knowledge and skill level. Upon successful completion of the 201 and 202
intermediate courses in the same language, the student will have met the language
requirement.
• Three years in high school of a classical language:
Students who have studied three years of the same classical language in high school
with a “B” average or better will fulfill the foreign language requirement by
completing one of these options:
a. 6 credit hours of approved international culture courses (see list above), or
b. The 101-102 level course sequence in the same modern, widely spoken foreign
language, such as French or Spanish, or
c. A score of 4 or higher on an Advanced Placement Language exam in Chinese,
French, German, Italian, Japanese or Spanish.
• Two years in high school of a classical language:
Students who have studied the same classical language for two years in high school
with a “B” average or better will fulfill the foreign language requirement by
completing one of these options:
a. Latin 201 and 202 (offered infrequently), Greek 201 and 202, or Hebrew 201
and 202, and 6 credit hours of approved international culture courses (see list
above), or

70 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

b.

The 101-102 level course sequence in the same modern, widely spoken foreign
language, such as French or Spanish, or
c. A score of 4 or higher on an Advanced Placement Language exam in Chinese,
French, German, Italian, Japanese or Spanish.
• Advanced Placement:
Students who receive credit for 201 and 202 level courses in Chinese, French,
German, Italian, Japanese or Spanish through an Advanced Placement foreign
language exam will have met the foreign language requirement. If the student
receives foreign language credit for 201 only, he/she will need to take the 202 level
in that same language to meet the foreign language requirement, unless the student
has received the exemption described above. The Advanced Placement policy is
published at www2.gcc.edu/registrar.
• TOEFL:
Students who submit a TOEFL report which indicates a native language other than
English will have met the foreign language requirement.
When a student changes from a major that does not require a foreign language to one
which does require it, the student will have to complete the requirement according to the
above guidelines. The following majors require the completion of a 201-202 foreign
language course sequence: Accounting; Biblical and Religious Studies; Business Analysis;
Business Economics; Business Statistics; Christian Ministries; Communication Arts;
Computer Science (BA); Design and Innovation; Economics; all Elementary, Middle Level,
and Secondary Education majors; English; Entrepreneurship; Finance; History; Human
Resource Management; International Business; Management; Marketing; Mathematics;
Philosophy; Political Science; Psychology; Social Work; and Sociology.
Refer to the “Modern Languages” section for more information regarding placement.

Chapel Attendance Requirement
Grove City College provides a chapel/convocation program to promote each student’s
spiritual and moral development during the student’s College educational experience. This
program is comprised of diverse services and activities, and while it is designed to
encourage spiritual growth, the College understands that ultimately Christian maturity is the
responsibility of the individual student and not the consequence of a requirement. Chapel
services are the common expression of our Christian faith as members of the campus
community. Thus, chapel/convocation attendance is a core component of the student’s
experience at Grove City College. Objectives of individual chapel events include the
following:
1. To provide occasions where all members of the academic community can express
a common faith in Jesus Christ.
2. To allow members of the campus community to utilize their talents and gifts in
ministry to other members of the community.
3. To challenge students theologically and spiritually from an Evangelical biblical
perspective.
4. To affirm students in their particular Christian tradition and experience spiritual
maturity in their individual faith expression.
5. To promote student appreciation and respect for other Christian traditions and
expressions different from their own.
6. To provide a context in which prayer can be offered on behalf of those in the
campus community who are experiencing tragedy or special need.
7. To develop student sensitivity and responsiveness to the needs of others in the
world.

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 71

There are many chapel options available to students, and each student is free to select
from these options according to his/her own interests as long as the student meets the
following per semester attendance requirements (fall/spring terms only):
1. Full-time students (12 or more credits) must attend twelve (12) chapels.
2. Students enrolled at least half-time but less than full-time (6 to 11 credits) must
attend six (6) chapels.
3. Students enrolled less than half-time (5 or fewer credits) are not required to attend
chapel.
Enrollment status will be determined for each student at the conclusion of the College’s
course drop/add week. Withdrawing from courses after that date will not affect the number
of chapels owed during a semester.
A student studying abroad through an external program; enrolled in the Washington,
DC, Internship Program; attending as a non-degree, post-baccalaureate or second-degree
student; or full-time student teaching will not be required to attend chapel during the
semester of that experience. Students enrolled in the Nursing Program will be required to
attend six (chapels) during their second and third year at Grove City College due to their
concurrent enrollment at Butler County Community College. Nursing Program students will
not be required to attend chapel during their final year due to off campus clinical studies.
There is no additional chapel requirement for a student who graduates early.
Chapel requirements not fulfilled in a semester must be made up (this includes any
unfulfilled chapel requirements from previous semesters). A student who owes six (6) or
more chapel requirements will not be permitted to register for the next semester until such
time the requirement is met. All grades and transcripts will be held for students who
withdraw from the College who have six (6) or more unfulfilled chapel requirements. Any
student who has not fulfilled the chapel attendance requirement by his/her graduation date
will not be certified as a graduate of Grove City College until the requirement has been
satisfied. Furthermore, students owing more than six (6) chapel requirements on Study Day
of the semester they are to graduate will not be permitted to participate in the College’s
commencement ceremony.

Degree Programs
Bachelor of Arts (B.A.)
The courses leading to the Bachelor of Arts degree offer the student an opportunity to
specialize in the field of his/her particular interest and to obtain enriching contacts with
other fields of liberal culture. The majors provide preparation for graduate work, teaching,
business, law, ministry, and other professions.

MAJORS AVAILABLE IN THE B.A. PROGRAM
Majors offered in the general liberal arts are Biblical and Religious Studies, Christian
Ministries, Communication Arts, Computer Science, Economics, English, French, History,
Philosophy, Political Science, Psychology, Sociology, and Spanish.
Certification for grades K-12 is available in French and Spanish and for grades 7-12 in
the following areas: English, English/Communication, and History (Social Studies).
Students may undertake to fulfill the requirements of a second major (not a second
degree) subject to availability of space in the classes. The College cannot, however, assure
students that they can in all instances complete a second major. Students earning two majors
in different degrees may select which baccalaureate degree they wish to be awarded.

72 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B.A. DEGREE
1. The General Education requirements.
2. Major requirements. Listed under the department in the Courses of Instruction section.
A status sheet for every major will be provided listing specific course and hour
requirements and should be maintained by the student; however, the Bulletin is the
authoritative document regarding requirements. At least one-half of all hours required
for the major must be earned at Grove City College. The major requirements determine
the Major Quality Point Average (MQPA) calculation.
3. Major-related requirements. These courses, though required for the major, do not
count toward the major QPA.
4. Electives. Sufficient elective hours to complete the total of 128 hours required for the
degree. To take advantage of the benefits of a liberal education and avoid overly narrow
specialization, a significant portion of these electives should be chosen from fields not
directly related to the student's field of concentration.
5. Chapel. Chapel attendance is a requirement for graduation from Grove City College.
Students are required to attend chapel sixteen times each semester.

Bachelor of Music (B.M.)
The courses leading to the Bachelor of Music degree offer students an opportunity to
specialize in the fields of music and fields of liberal culture. The majors provide preparation
for graduate work, teaching, business, performance and religious professions.

MAJORS AVAILABLE IN THE B.M. PROGRAM
The Department of Music offers majors in Music, Music and Business, Music and
Religion, and Music Performance.
The Department also offers a Music Education major with certification in grades PreK12 that leads to the Bachelor of Music degree. Definite music development and completion
of all requirements are necessary for graduation. The course is approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Education for the preparation of music teachers.
Candidates for the B.A. or the B.S. degree may present a maximum of eighteen
semester hours in the field of music as electives in their courses. If applied music is taken,
a maximum of eight hours will be accepted with the remaining ten hours to be elected from
the music curriculum and ensemble.
The Department of Music offers opportunities to all students of the College to
participate in music ensemble activities, which are directed by members of the music staff.
These activities include the College choirs, the orchestras, the bands, and the jazz bands.
Students will be granted one credit hour per semester for membership in the band,
orchestra or choir. Credit may be received for membership in two of these organizations per
semester for non-music majors. Three rehearsal hours are held each week. More than three
absences from rehearsals, performances or public appearances during a semester will cancel
the credit.

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B.M. DEGREE
1. The General Education requirements.
2. Major requirements. Listed under the Department of Music in the Courses of
Instruction section. A status sheet for every major will be provided listing specific
course and hour requirements and should be maintained by the student; however, the
Bulletin is the authoritative document regarding requirements. At least one-half of all
hours required for the major must be earned at Grove City College. The major
requirements determine the Major Quality Point Average (MQPA) calculation.

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 73

3. Major-related requirements. These courses, though required for the major, do not
count toward the major QPA.
4. Electives. Sufficient elective hours to complete the total of 128 hours required for the
degree. To take advantage of the benefits of a liberal education and avoid overly narrow
specialization, a significant portion of these electives should be chosen from fields not
directly related to the student's field of concentration.
5. Chapel. Chapel attendance is a requirement for graduation from Grove City College.
6. NOTE: Minimum piano and vocal proficiency is required of all music majors. All
Bachelor of Music candidates must have eight semester hours of applied music in voice
or one instrument to complete requirements for their public senior recital.

Bachelor of Science (B.S.)
The courses leading to the Bachelor of Science degree offer the student an opportunity
to specialize in the fields of science and enriching contacts with other fields of liberal
culture. The majors provide preparation for graduate work, teaching, business, industry and
the various health-related professions.

MAJORS AVAILABLE IN THE B.S. PROGRAM
The majors include Accounting, Applied Science and Engineering, Biochemistry,
Biology, Biology/Health, Business Analysis, Business Statistics, Chemistry, Computer
Engineering, Computer Science, Conservation Biology, Data Science, Design and
Innovation, Elementary Education, Elementary Education with Special Education,
Entrepreneurship, Exercise Science, Finance, Human Resource Management, Management,
Marketing, Mathematics, Middle Level Math/English Education, Middle Level
Math/History Education, Middle Level Science/English Education, Middle Level
Science/History Education, Middle Level Science/Math Education, Middle Level
Math/English and Elementary Education, Middle Level Math/History and Elementary
Education, Middle Level Science/English and Elementary Education, Middle Level
Science/History and Elementary Education, Middle Level Science/Math and Elementary
Education, Molecular Biology, Physics, Psychology, Social Work, Special Education, and
Supply Chain Management. Interdepartmental majors are also available in
Physics/Computer, Business Economics, and International Business.
Teacher certification in Elementary Education; Special Education with concentrations;
middle level in Math/English, Math/History, Science/Math, Science/English, or
Science/History. Certification for grades 7-12 is available in the following areas:
Biology/General Science, Chemistry, Chemistry/General Science, Mathematics, Physics,
and Physics/General Science.
Students may choose to fulfill the requirements of a second major (not a second degree)
subject to the availability of space in the classes. The College cannot, however, assure
students that they can in all instances complete a second major. Students earning two majors
in different degrees may select which baccalaureate degree they wish to be awarded.

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B.S. DEGREE
1.
2.

The General Education requirements.
Major requirements. Listed under the department in the Courses of Instruction
section. A status sheet for every major will be provided listing specific course and hour
requirements and should be maintained by the student; however, the Bulletin is the
authoritative document regarding requirements. At least one-half of all hours required
for the major must be earned at Grove City College. The major requirements determine
the Major Quality Point Average (MQPA) calculation.

74 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

3.
4.

5.

Major-related requirements. These courses, though required for the major, do not
count toward the major QPA.
Electives. Sufficient elective hours to complete the total of 128 hours required for the
degree. To take advantage of the benefits of a liberal education and avoid overly narrow
specialization, a significant portion of these electives should be chosen from fields not
directly related to the student's field of concentration.
Chapel. Chapel attendance is a requirement for graduation from Grove City College.

PRE-HEALTH PROFESSIONS
Students who wish to meet the requirements for admission to medical college or other
health-related colleges normally follow programs of study offered by either the biology or
chemistry departments. Other departmental majors are possible, but students should be sure
to complete required prerequisites in their desired fields.

Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering (B.S.E.E.)
The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering offers an undergraduate
program leading to the degree Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering. The electrical
engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET,
http://www.abet.org. The field of concentration provides preparation for graduate work and
employment in industry.

CONCENTRATIONS FOR THE B.S.E.E. DEGREE
The electrical engineering program provides selective options in Electrical
Engineering Concentration or Computer Engineering Concentration. Reflecting the
fundamental objectives of a liberal education, the program requires, in addition to
mathematics, a number of hours in the liberal arts as well as the General Education
requirements. The use of computers is an integral part of the Electrical Engineering
concentration. Students are well prepared to enter the engineering field, as well as the civic
and cultural activities where they live and work.

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B.S.E.E. DEGREE
1. The General Education requirements.
2. Major requirements. Listed under the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering in the Courses of Instruction section. A status sheet for this major will be
provided listing specific course and hour requirements and should be maintained by the
student; however, the Bulletin is the authoritative document regarding requirements. At
least one-half of all hours required for the major must be earned at Grove City College.
The major requirements determine the Major Quality Point Average (MQPA)
calculation.
3. Major-related requirements. These courses, though required for the major, do not
count toward the major QPA.
4. Electives. Sufficient elective hours to complete the total of 128 hours required for the
degree.
5. Chapel. Chapel attendance is a requirement for graduation from Grove City College.

Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering (B.S.M.E.)
The Department of Mechanical Engineering offers an undergraduate program leading
to the degree Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering. The mechanical engineering
program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET,
http://www.abet.org. The course of study provides preparation for graduate work and
employment in industry.

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 75

The Mechanical Engineering program provides an extensive offering of required
foundational courses as well as elective courses in the mechanical and thermal systems
areas. Reflecting the fundamental objectives of a liberal education, the program requires, in
addition to mathematics and the sciences, a number of hours in the liberal arts as well as the
General Education requirements. The use of computers and discipline specific software is
an integral part of the Mechanical Engineering curriculum. Students are well prepared to
enter the engineering field, as well as the civic and cultural activities where they live and
work.
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B.S.M.E. DEGREE
1. The General Education requirements.
2. Major requirements. Listed under the Department of Mechanical Engineering in the
Courses of Instruction section. A status sheet for this major will be provided listing
specific course and hour requirements and should be maintained by the student;
however, the Bulletin is the authoritative document regarding requirements. At least
one-half of all hours required for the major must be earned at Grove City College. The
major requirements determine the Major Quality Point Average (MQPA) calculation.
3. Major-related requirements. These courses, though required for the major, do not
count toward the major QPA.
4. Electives. Sufficient elective hours to complete the total of 128 hours required for the
degree.
5. Chapel. Chapel attendance is a requirement for graduation from Grove City College.

Bachelor of Science in Nursing (B.S.N.)
The Charles Jr. and Betty Johnson School of Nursing at Grove City College opened in
the Fall of 2020. Grove City College partners with Butler County Community College to
provide a robust nursing program that includes an Associate Degree in Applied Science
achieved after the third-year of study from Butler County Community College and a
Bachelor of Science in Nursing degree from Grove City College achieved after the fourthyear of study upon completion of all graduation requirements.
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B.S.N. DEGREE
1. The General Education requirements.
2. Major requirements. Listed under the department in the Courses of Instruction section.
A status sheet for the nursing major provides a list of specific courses and hour
requirements and should be maintained by the student; however, the Bulletin is the
authoritative document regarding requirements. At least one-half of all hours required
for the major must be earned at Grove City College. The major requirements completed
at Grove City College determine the Major Quality Point Average (MQPA) calculation.
3. Major-related requirements. These courses, though required for the major, do not
count toward the major QPA.
4. Electives. Sufficient elective hours to complete the total of 128 hours required for the
degree. To take advantage of the benefits of a liberal education and avoid overly narrow
specialization, a significant portion of these electives should be chosen from fields not
directly related to the student's field of concentration.
5. Chapel. Chapel attendance is a requirement for graduation from Grove City College.
CHANGING DEGREE PROGRAMS
A student may change to a different major or degree program, with the permission of
the appropriate Department Chair, when space is available within that major or program. In
some cases, the Dean of the appropriate school (Arts and Letters, Science, Engineering, and

76 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

Mathematics or School of Business) must also approve the change. Forms to change majors
are available on the Registrar’s website (www.gcc.edu/registrar).
Any student changing from a program which does not require foreign language
proficiency to one that does (i.e. all B.A. programs and non-science B.S. programs) will be
required to demonstrate proficiency according to the guidelines regarding “Foreign
Language” under “General Education Requirements.”
DUAL DEGREE PROGRAM
A student may earn two degrees simultaneously from Grove City College in two
different degree programs pending availability of space in the majors selected and by
meeting the following requirements:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

At least 32 additional credit hours must be applied to the second degree beyond the
128 required for the first degree, with a minimum total of 160 hours earned.
Majors must be completed in two different degree programs, e.g. Bachelor of
Science/Bachelor of Arts (BS/BA), Bachelor of Science in Electrical
Engineering/Bachelor of Arts (BSEE/BA), etc.
Satisfy all requirements for both degrees, including general education and major
requirements.
Students must complete all requirements in force for the chosen majors at the time
of matriculation to the College.
Minimum career QPA required: 2.00.
Minimum QPA in both majors: 2.00.
Chapel requirement: No additional chapels are required.
College and departmental honors will be recognized for both degrees since the full
body of work is completed within the dual degree program.
A student must notify the Registrar’s Office in writing of an intent to pursue two
degrees simultaneously, listing both degrees and majors, total credits earned to the
current date, and intended date of completion of all requirements.

SECOND DEGREE PROGRAM
A student holding a baccalaureate degree from Grove City College or another
accredited four-year college or university may earn a second baccalaureate degree in a
different field. To earn a second baccalaureate degree, the student must:
• Have completed all requirements for the first baccalaureate degree.
• Satisfy all requirements for the second degree, including major and general
education requirements.
• Students who have earned their first baccalaureate degree from Grove City College
must earn a minimum of 32 credit hours at Grove City College beyond the 128
hours required for the first degree, with a minimum total of 160 hours earned and
a minimum CQPA of 2.00.
• Students who have earned their first baccalaureate degree from another college
must earn a minimum of 64 credit hours from Grove City College and a minimum
total of 128 earned hours for their second baccalaureate degree. The Registrar’s
Office and the student’s department chair will evaluate the student’s transcript and
determine transfer course equivalents.
• Majors must be completed in two different degree programs, e.g. Bachelor of
Science/Bachelor of Arts (BS/BA), Bachelor of Science in Electrical
Engineering/Bachelor of Arts (BSEE/BA), etc.
• A student must complete all requirements in force at the time of matriculation to
the College for the start of the second degree program unless the student graduates

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 77

from the College and returns within one year, he/she may then continue to follow
the catalog requirements in force of his/her original undergraduate matriculation.
• Minimum career QPA required: 2.00.
• Minimum QPA in both majors: 2.00.
• No college or departmental honors or class ranking will be recognized for a second
baccalaureate degree since students do not complete the full body of work within
the second-degree division.
• Any student who repeats an undergraduate course within his/her second-degree
program that counted toward the first degree may not count those hours toward
completion of the second degree, however, any repeated hours earned will be
included when calculating the second degree QPA.
• Students completing a second degree may participate in Commencement.
Students interested in pursuing a second degree should contact the Registrar's Office
for information regarding program details and requirements.
MINORS
Minors are not required, but are available in Accounting, AI and Machine Learning,
Astronomy, Biblical and Religious Studies, Biology, Business, Business Analysis,
Chemistry, Christian Ministries, Classical Christian Education, Classical Studies,
Communication Arts, Computer Game Design and Development, Computer Science,
Creative Writing, Criminal Justice Studies, Cybersecurity, Data Science, Design, Digital
Entrepreneurship, Digital Marketing, Economics, English, Entrepreneurship, Exercise
Science, Family Studies, Finance, French, High-Tech Entrepreneurship, History, Human
Resource Management, International Business, International Studies, Management,
Marketing, Mathematics, Medical Physics, Medieval Studies, Missional Entrepreneurship,
Mobile Development, Music, Musical Theatre, National Security Studies, Nutrition,
Philosophy, Physics, Political Philosophy and Theology, Political Science, Pre-Law,
Psychology, Redemptive Entrepreneurship, Robotics, Sales, Social Enterprise, Social
Entrepreneurship, Social Innovation, Social Work, Sociology, Spanish, Special Education,
Sports Management, Studio Art, Supply Chain Management, Theatre, Writing, and Youth
Ministry.
Students may fulfill the requirements of a minor, subject to availability of space in the
classes. At least one-half of all hours required for the minor must be earned at Grove City
College and a minor QPA of 2.00 for all coursework completed in each declared minor.
The College cannot, however, assure students that they can in all instances complete a
minor.
INDEPENDENT/RESEARCH/HONORS STUDY
A student may pursue areas of interest not available through regular course offerings
as listed in the Grove City College Bulletin by registering for an independent study (260,
360, 460), independent research (270, 370, 470) or honors course (498, 499) in the
department of choice, provided a faculty sponsor is available and the study experience is
approved by the appropriate Department Chair, Dean, and the Registrar’s Office.
The following policies apply:
• Independent study, research, and honors experiences are available to full-time
students during the fall and spring semesters only.
• A maximum of six hours of independent study, independent research, or honors
courses combined may count within the 128 hours required for graduation (course
numbers 260, 270, 360, 370, 460, 470, 498 and 499). A maximum of six additional
hours of independent study/research/honors courses may be taken beyond the 128

78 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

hours required for graduation, but these hours may not count toward any
requirement for graduation.
Independent study must be completed on campus; however, an off-campus course
may be approved, but only when done in conjunction with an approved 12-credit
internship program.
No more than two independent study, research, or honors courses may be taken by
a student during a single academic year.
Independent study, research, and honors courses may not substitute for required
courses in the general education, major, minor or concentration areas.
The established time involved for each credit hour awarded should be equal to
fifteen hours of equivalent in-class time plus a minimum of thirty hours outside
preparation time.
Independent study, research, and honor courses must be added or dropped during
the normal semester registration period or during the College’s drop/add week at
the beginning of each semester.
Individual departments may have minimum CQPA restrictions to qualify for
independent work.
Faculty may supervise no more than a total of nine credit hours of
independent experiences and/or five students each semester.

Registration Process:
• A student should first work with a faculty sponsor to design an appropriate program
of study. All requirements for the experience must be outlined in the course
syllabus. The faculty sponsor will show his/her approval of the study by signing
the application.
• Next, the application and completed course syllabus is reviewed by the Department
Chair in which the proposed study will occur and then by the Dean of the
corresponding School. The study form and syllabus will then be submitted to the
Registrar’s office for final review. Students will not be enrolled in the class until
this form has been approved by the Registrar’s Office.
INTERNSHIPS
Grove City College recognizes that an internship can be one of the more valuable
experiences a student can have during his or her college career. Practical experience in the
workplace is not only an education in itself; it is also increasingly demanded by potential
employers in today's marketplace. Students need the opportunity to take advantage of the
education, practical experience, and resume potential which only internships can provide.
An extensive variety of internship opportunities, therefore, are provided across the
curriculum, and all eligible students are encouraged to participate in them whenever
possible. Individual internship experiences may range between one to six credit hours.
Students must work a minimum of 60 hours for each credit earned, and some departments
may require more for each credit. As part of hours earned, students are not permitted in any
instance to double count hours or include hours outside of scheduled time with the host site.
Students should contact the department coordinator for specific working hour requirements.
Departmental internships are available for a wide variety of majors and are listed in the
course descriptions under the number "480." The Washington Internship Program
requirements are outlined below.
Internships must be approved and registered prior to the start of the experience. An
Internship Fee will be charged for each internship experience on a per-semester basis. (See
Expenses and Financial Aid) However, if the internship credit hours extend the total credit

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 79

hours over 17, then no additional credit hour fee will be charged. The Washington Internship
Program has a different fee structure which is outlined below.
While students may do internships purely for the purpose of gaining experience and
not for academic credit, the College can certify only those internships done for academic
credit under the established programs and guidelines. A maximum of six hours of internship
credit may be used toward graduation requirements. A maximum of six additional hours of
internship may be earned beyond the 128 total hours required for graduation.
The College does not grant internship credit for any experience in which a student is
paid by the federal government, for whatever reason. Conversely, if credit is granted by the
College for an internship, then a federal stipend may not be accepted by the student. In no
situation may a student accept federal money related to participation in an internship and
receive academic credit, as this is prohibited by College policy.
WASHINGTON INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
The Grove City College Washington Internship Program provides students from any
academic major practical experience working in Washington D.C. while earning credit for
graduation. The program is available to qualified juniors and seniors and counts for twelve
credit hours for either the fall or spring semester. A student may also earn up to three credit
hours of independent study in the fall/spring concurrent with his/her Washington D.C.
experience, but not as a substitute for an on-campus course offering.
Students enrolled in POLS 481 (Washington Internship) will be required to complete a
major research paper and an Internship Folder. The paper should review professional
literature appropriate to the intern's area of specialization and comment on the extent to
which research activities undertaken on the job reflect the state of knowledge treated in this
review. The Internship Folder comprises policy briefs of presentations made by speakers at
seminars, public hearings, congressional meetings, White House announcements, and other
official occasions in which public policy statements and discussions take place. At least
fourteen policy briefs are assigned each semester. Interns maintain a log of activities at their
place of work and retain copies of documents illustrating research efforts and other
assignments requested by their supervisors.
The College does not grant internship credit for any experience in which a student is
paid by the federal government, for whatever reason. Conversely, if credit is granted by the
College for an internship, then a federal stipend may not be accepted by the student. In no
situation may a student accept federal money related to participation in an internship and
receive academic credit, as this is prohibited by College policy.
Tuition during the fall and spring semesters is the same as that charged for a full-time
semester of study at Grove City College. Interns are responsible for securing their own
housing in Washington D.C., and costs may vary. All inquiries about application forms,
deadlines, letters of recommendation, and other matters related to this program should be
directed to the Political Science Department Chair.
INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION
Study abroad is available to qualified students from any academic major in summer,
semester, and year-long formats. Grove City College students may enroll in programs
offered abroad in English or in another language, and may, with prior approval, apply
courses completed abroad to specific on-campus requirements for their majors.
Grove City College accepts transfer credits directly from well-established foreign
universities or colleges where the student will be taught in a classroom setting for the
duration of the semester abroad. If the study abroad program is not affiliated with a wellestablished foreign university or college, the program must be sponsored by a regionally
accredited U.S. college or university, and the student will be required to submit an official

80 / GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS

transcript from the sponsoring U.S. institution. Transcripts from the study abroad program
itself will not be accepted for granting credit. Credit will not be accepted for any study
abroad program that is not affiliated with a well-established foreign university and/or a
sponsoring U.S. regionally accredited college or university.
Selection of a program and of specific courses takes place in consultation with the
department chair of the student's major, the Director of the Office of Global Programs, and
the Registrar. There is a Study Abroad Fee for this program, applicable only to semester or
year-long study abroad experiences. This fee is not charged to students studying abroad for
intersession or summer terms. All inquiries regarding program options, application forms,
deadlines, letters of recommendation and other matters related to study abroad should be
directed to the Office of Global Programs. The Registrar’s Office is responsible for transfer
course evaluation as well as the official transfer of credits upon course completion with
receipt of an official transcript.
Students who have applied for and been awarded Grove City College financial aid for
the academic year in which they are studying abroad, including all College-provided merit
and need-based awards, will continue to receive that award during the semester(s) when
they participate in a full-time study-abroad program which has been approved by the
Registrar. The criteria for receiving financial aid will be the same as for on-campus study.
MEDICAL OPTION PLAN
Under certain conditions Grove City College will waive the senior year in residence
and may approve the transfer of the first year of graduate courses from an accredited medical
school toward the baccalaureate degree. Students considering this option must petition the
faculty for approval and must meet the following provisions:
• During residence at Grove City College, the student must attain a career quality point
average of 3.00 or higher and have earned no less than ninety-six semester hours of
credit.
• Academic credits earned must include all specific general education and major
requirements for the degree.
• Certification of the successful completion of the first year's work in the professional
school must be presented for approval and evaluation before the baccalaureate
degree may be conferred.
• Students who do not complete their approved first-year medical school courses may
petition the faculty of Grove City College for the awarding of the baccalaureate
degree at the time the professional diploma is awarded.
• Students will not be considered enrolled at Grove City College and will be subject
to all policies governing withdrawal from the College. Therefore, participating in the
Medical Option Plan will affect the student’s enrollment status, financial aid and
retention of the College-issued computer system.
Students interested in pursuing this option should contact the Registrar's Office for
information regarding program details and requirements.
Grove City College does not accept any funds that derive in any part, directly or
indirectly, from federal sources (including scholarship or loan funds). Students who receive
any federal financial assistance during their first year of a graduate program will be
ineligible to receive credit from Grove City College, and thus ineligible to continue in the
Medical Option Plan.
ADULT EDUCATION
Adults living in the local community may attend a class for no credit during a semester
for a small fee, pending consent of the professor and seat availability in the classroom.

GENERAL EDUCATION AND DEGREE PROGRAMS/ 81

Grove City College will maintain a permanent record of enrollment for participants, but no
grade or credit will be recorded by the Registrar.

82 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
Academic Schools
The academic programs at Grove City College are divided into three schools – the Alva J.
Calderwood School of Arts and Letters, the Albert A. Hopeman, Jr., School of Science,
Engineering, and Mathematics, and the School of Business. These three schools
encompass all departments of instruction and provide students with a choice of numerous
majors, minors, certifications, concentrations, and pre-professional programs.

Alva J. Calderwood School of Arts and Letters
Dr. Paul C. Kemeny, Dean; Dr. Lisa Hosack, Assistant Dean; Dr. Gary L. Welton, Assistant
Dean.
Alva J. Calderwood grew up on a farm outside of New Bedford,
Pennsylvania, and was tending the crops one day when a journeyman
teacher by the name of Dr. Isaac Ketler visited his home in search of
students to enroll in the newly formed Grove City College. Dr.
Calderwood subsequently enrolled and graduated from the College in
1896, continued his education at Harvard, and earned both a Master of
Arts and a Doctor of Philosophy degree. He eventually returned to his
alma mater and served as a professor for 53 years and as Dean of the
College for 35 years. He was honored for his many years of outstanding
Alva J. Calderwood
service when Calderwood Hall, erected in 1956, was named for him.
1873-1949
Calderwood Hall was torn down in February 2003 and replaced by the
new Hall of Arts and Letters, and in November 2002, the Alva J. Calderwood School of
Arts and Letters was named in his honor.
The Alva J. Calderwood School of Arts and Letters is comprised of the Departments
of Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy; Communication and Visual Arts;;
Education; English;; History; Modern Languages; Music; Political Science, Psychology
and Social Work.

Albert A. Hopeman, Jr. School of Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics
Dr. Richard N. Savage, Dean; Dr. Kristina O. Pazehoski, Interim Assistant Dean.

Albert A. Hopeman, Jr.
1911-1998

Albert A. Hopeman, Jr. became the fifth president of the Grove City
College Board of Trustees in 1972, joining the Board in 1953 and serving
till his death in 1998. He was a firm advocate of excellent education in a
Christian environment at a low cost. He led the College during the years
of the well-known 1984 U.S. Supreme Court case Grove City College vs.
T. H. Bell, Secretary of the U.S. Department of Education, which resulted
in Grove City College’s withdrawal from the federal Pell Grant program.
Grove City College also withdrew from federal student loan programs in
1996 and developed a competitive private student loan program under
his leadership. The School of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
was named in his honor in May of 1997.

The Albert A. Hopeman, Jr. School of Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics is comprised of the Departments of Biology; Chemistry; Computer Science;

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 83

Engineering; Exercise Science; Mathematics; Physics; and the Charles Jr. and Betty
Johnson School of Nursing.
The following sections are arranged in alphabetical order by department and include
the requirements for each major, course descriptions, and all faculty members within each
department.

The School of Business
Dr. Michelle McFeaters, Dean.
The School of Business was designed to prepare current and future students for success,
service, and ethical leadership in the marketplace. The School is comprised of the
Departments of Accounting and Finance; Economics; Entrepreneurship; and Management
and Marketing. These departments offer 15 majors, including several graduate programs.

Accounting and Finance
Mrs. Stone, Chair; Mr. Graybill, Dr. Grimm, Dr. McFeaters, Ms. Shultz, Dr. O. Zhang.
Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. Davidek, Mrs. DiDonato, Mr. Natali.
The mission of the business program at Grove City College is to prepare our
students to become effective and ethical leaders in business as well as in society
as a whole. This mission incorporates the following learning outcomes:
1. Business Knowledge and Analytical Skills: Our students will
demonstrate the entry level knowledge and analytical skills necessary in
their professional field.
2. Communication Skills: Our students will demonstrate the written and
verbal skills needed to communicate effectively within the business
environment.
3. Ethics: Our students will demonstrate a Christian understanding of
business which reflects its moral and ethical responsibilities to all
potential stakeholders.
4. Global Perspective: Our students will demonstrate an understanding of
the global and multi-cultural issues in the current business environment.
5. Accounting Knowledge and Skills: Our students will demonstrate the
ability to prepare and analyze financial information used in managerial
decision-making and external reporting for publicly- and privately- held
business organizations, governmental entities, and non-profit
organizations. Our students will demonstrate an understanding of
accounting systems and their related internal controls and will
demonstrate the ability to prepare and to audit financial statements that
are generated from these accounting systems. Our students will
demonstrate the ability to apply federal tax law in the preparation of
individual tax returns. Our students will engage with the coursework
needed to prepare for professional certification exams.
6. Finance Knowledge and Skills: Our students will demonstrate
knowledge and skills that meet or exceed requirements to compete for
entry-level positions in a variety of settings, including corporate finance
and the financial services industry. This includes knowledge of finance
principles, investments, and advanced topics in corporate finance. Our
students will engage with the coursework needed to prepare for
professional certification exams.

84 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

The ACBSP accredited Accounting and Finance majors prepare students for entry-level
careers in all arenas of accounting and finance, including public accounting; corporate,
partnership, or sole proprietorship accounting; governmental and NGO accounting;
corporate finance; financial services; and various positions in the non-profit sector,
including areas such as education and health care.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Accounting—70 hours
Accounting Core (30 hours):
Accounting 201-202, 301, 302, 303, 321, 401, 402, 403, and 405.
Business Core (21 hours):
Management 103, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104; Finance 301 and Statistics 131.
Major Electives (9 hours)
Choose nine additional hours from any 200-, 300-, or 400-level courses in
Accounting, Entrepreneurship, Finance, International Business, Management, or
Marketing (maximum of 3 hours of internship credit toward the 70 hours for the
B.S. degree). Students pursuing their CPA license should consider taking
Accounting 404, Accounting 406, and/or Accounting 410. (Please see additional
information later in this section under “CPA Licensing Requirements”.)
Major-related courses (10 hours):
Mathematics 141 or 161*; Economics 101 and 102.
* Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261.
Courses that count in the Accounting major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE 105), “INBS”, “MARK”,
“MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106) prefix, and STAT 131. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A maximum of three accounting (ACCT) courses may be taken in any
one semester unless approval is obtained by department chair and faculty advisor.
It is recommended that students planning to enter the field of public accounting take
additional accounting courses to satisfy their major electives.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Finance—67 hours
Business Core Courses (33 hours):
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103,
110, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104 and Statistics 131.
Math/Economics Courses (10 hours):
Economics 101, 102; Mathematics 141 or 161*
*Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261.
Finance Major Core Courses (12 hours):
Finance 332, 341, 436, and 440.
Finance Major Elective Courses (12 hours):
Choose twelve additional hours from any 200-, 300-, or 400-level courses in
Accounting, Economics, Entrepreneurship, Finance, International Business,
Management, or Marketing. A minimum of six hours must be Finance, excluding

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 85

460 and 480. A maximum of three hours of internship may count as finance electives;
any remaining internship credits will count as general electives.
Courses that count in the Finance major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE 105), “INBS”,
“MARK”, and “MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106) prefix, and STAT 131. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Students who graduate with a major in finance receive comprehensive training in
business, along with specialized instruction in corporate finance and investment
management. Advanced level courses in capital markets, financial planning and valuation
provide the student with career-specific training. Students learn practical applications from
research projects, simulations, and Harvard-style case studies.
Writing, Speaking and Information Literacy Intensive Courses
It is essential for students majoring in the Department of Accounting and Finance to
possess strong writing, speaking, and information literacy (knowing how to locate, analyze,
and use information in decision-making) skills in preparation for careers in accounting and
finance and/or graduate studies. The curriculum requirements specifically designed to
develop these skills include Management 214 Business, Ethics, and Society and
Management 486 Business Policy and Strategy. Please see course descriptions that follow
for more information.
CPA Licensing Requirements: 150-Credit Hour, 4-Year Double Majors:
The Department of Accounting and Finance offers two programs, one leading to a 150credit hour double major in Accounting and Finance and the second leading to a 150-credit
hour double major in Accounting and Business Analysis. Both programs, which satisfies
the CPA licensing requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as well as most
other states, are designed, through summer, intersession, and/or winter term coursework, to
be completed in four years. Students entering Grove City College as freshmen with
Advanced Placement (AP) credits or other college credits will find this program particularly
of interest.
The traditional 128-credit hour Accounting major is available as a degree option and it
is the foundation of the 150-hour double majors. In addition to completing requirements for
the Accounting major as outlined on the previous page, students choosing a double major
option will also need to satisfy the following requirements:
• Accounting-Finance Dual Major
• Finance 332, 341, 436, and 440; International Business 205; and Management
110 (18 hours).
• Accounting-Business Analysis Dual Major
• Computer Science 141, 220, 244; International Business 205; Management
204, 307, 310, and Statistics 132 (24 hours). Students pursing the CPA are also
recommended to complete Accounting 404, 406, or 410.
Students interested in this dual major program will be on record with Accounting as
their first major and either Finance or Business Analysis as their second major. Students
may enter Grove City College declaring the double major or may add the second major after
matriculation. Please contact the Accounting and Finance Department Chair for more
information.
Students who are interested in obtaining 150 credit hours to meet CPA licensing
requirements are not limited to these double major programs. Students may select any
courses they choose to make up the additional credits beyond 128 hours. Popular options

86 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

double majoring in another Business Program major, double majoring in another College
program, and or minoring in any number of areas across the College programs.
Course Requirements for a minor in Accounting (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-Accounting majors only)
A minor in Accounting will consist of Accounting 201, 202, 301, 321, 405, and one
course from Accounting 302, 303, 305, 310, 401, 402, 403, or 406.
Course Requirements for a minor in Finance (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-Finance majors only)
A minor in Finance shall consist of Finance 301, 332, 440, and three courses from
Finance 334, 341, 435, 436, 462, or Entrepreneurship 430.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Accounting (ACCT)
ACCT 201. PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING I. This introductory course focuses on
the preparation and use of accounting information in the financial reporting environment.
Emphasis is placed on the understanding and application of steps involved in the accounting
cycle as well as on the recognition, measurement, and reporting issues associated with
various financial statement accounts for sole proprietorships and partnerships using the
accrual basis of accounting. The course also exposes the student to career opportunities in
the accounting profession.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ACCT 202. PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING II. Course topics include accounting for
debt and stockholder’s equity, financial statement analysis, statement of cash flows, as well
as introductions to managerial accounting techniques including cost-volume-profit analysis,
budgeting, product costing, standard costs, and decision-making analysis. Prerequisite:
Accounting 201.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ACCT 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
accounting. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ACCT 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in accounting. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ACCT 301. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING I. A study of the financial statements
with an emphasis on the income statement and asset section of the balance sheet. This course
also focuses on accounting theory, the interpretation of financial accounting standards
associated with the balance sheet, and International Financial Reporting Standards [IFRS].
Prerequisite: Accounting 202.
Fall semester only, three hours plus lab.
ACCT 302. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING II. A continued study of the financial
statements with an emphasis on the liabilities and stockholder’s equity sections of the
balance sheet. Includes topics such as earnings per share (EPS), accounting for income
taxes, leases, and pensions, and the statement of cash flows. This course also focuses on
accounting theory and the interpretation of current financial accounting standards, including
IFRS. Prerequisite: Accounting 202.
Spring semester only, three hours plus lab.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 87

ACCT 303. COST ACCOUNTING. A study of cost flows in a manufacturing
environment and the assignment of direct and indirect manufacturing costs to a company's
cost of goods sold and inventory accounts by the application of job order, process, and
standard costing systems. The course also focuses on the ways in which accounting
information is used in operational decision-making. Prerequisite: Accounting 202.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ACCT 310. DATA ANALYTICS FOR ACCOUNTING. This course will study data
analytics and its applications in accounting contexts, with an emphasis on data preparation,
modeling, analysis and interpretation, and visualization. Students will complete hands-on
activities using data analysis software. Topics will include data analytics for accounting and
identifying the questions, mastering the data, performing the testing plan and analyzing the
results, communicating the results and visualizations, the modern accounting environment,
and financial statement analytics. Prerequisite: Accounting 202.
Semester course, three hours.
ACCT 321. ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS. A study of the use of a
variety of resources designed to transform financial and other data into financial information
for decision-making. Consideration of these systems must deal with issues such as the flow
of transactions and related procedures; summarizing the financial data into meaningful
formats for both internal and external reporting; documentation for audit trail purposes; data
security and backup; and disaster recovery planning. The course will emphasize transaction
cycles, business processes, systems controls, and accounting database applications.
Prerequisites: Accounting 202.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ACCT 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
accounting. Prerequisites: Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ACCT 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in accounting. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ACCT 390. STUDIES IN ACCOUNTING. Studies in areas of accounting not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings.
Semester course, three hours.
ACCT 401. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING I. A study of the financial accounting effects
on business entities involved in mergers, consolidations, and divestitures with an emphasis
on the proper recognition and recording of acquisition, the elimination of inter-company
transactions, and the preparation of consolidated financial statements. Prerequisite:
Accounting 202.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ACCT 402. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING II. A study of the financial accounting
principles used in the preparation of general-purpose financial statements for governmental
units, not-for-profit corporations and associations including colleges and universities, health
care entities, voluntary health and welfare organizations, and partnerships. Foreign
exchange transactions and other special topics are also covered. Prerequisite: Accounting
302.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ACCT 403. AUDITING. A study of the duties and responsibilities of professional auditing,
including types of audits and audit programs, audit planning, evidence, risk assessment,
preparation of audit working papers, and audit reports. Prerequisites: Accounting 302 and
321.
Fall semester only, three hours.

88 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

ACCT 404. ADVANCED AUDITING. Additional auditing issues are explored, including
practical applications involving statistical sampling, IT controls, risk assessment, and audit
evidence gathering. Legal issues in auditing and other types of non-attest services are also
discussed. Prerequisites: Accounting 403 and senior standing.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ACCT 405. TAX ACCOUNTING. A study of the provisions of the federal tax laws and
the proper practices in preparing tax reports with emphasis on tax preparation for
individuals. Prerequisite: Accounting 202.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ACCT 406. ADVANCED TAX ACCOUNTING. Theory and practice in the treatment of
partnership and corporate taxes with emphasis on the accounting and management planning
aspects. Prerequisites: Accounting 405 and senior standing.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ACCT 410. CONTEMPORARY ACCOUNTING THEORY AND PRACTICE. A
capstone course that stresses contemporary financial accounting issues and theory and that
familiarizes the student with interpretation of current accounting standards. Other nonfinancial topics are briefly covered. Prerequisites: Accounting 302 and senior standing.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ACCT 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
accounting. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.8
ACCT 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in accounting. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ACCT 480. INTERNSHIP IN ACCOUNTING. This is an opportunity for accounting
majors to participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an
employer and department faculty member. Most internships take place during the summer
months. Students will be graded based on an employer performance evaluation along with
a written paper and journal. Prerequisites: Good academic standing and completion of the
freshman year of study.
One to six hours.

Finance (FNCE)
FNCE 105. PERSONAL FINANCE. An introduction to the complexities of personal
financial planning, such as managing personal debt (including educational debt); choosing
health, life, and property insurance; making investments; and understanding income
taxation, retirement, and estate planning. It provides a broad overview of important personal
financial management tools and is geared towards students of all majors. (This course does
not count towards the Accounting or Finance major requirements).
Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 89

FNCE 301. PRINCIPLES OF FINANCE. This course explains important concepts and
applications in corporate finance, such as time value of money, security valuation, capital
budgeting, portfolio theory, and capital structure. This is a mathematics intensive course
designed to develop analytical thinking skills. Prerequisites: Accounting 201 and
Management 201. This course is the key building block for upper-level finance courses; as
such, Finance majors should complete the course by the end of the sophomore year.
Additionally, it is a building block for ACCT 302, and Accounting majors should complete
the course by the end of the first semester of their sophomore year.
Semester course, three hours.
FNCE 332. INVESTMENTS. This course examines a variety of topics commonly
associated with investment in publicly traded securities and mutual funds. It examines ways
in which financial market data is utilized as inputs into models for asset pricing and portfolio
management. It also explores topics such as index construction, portfolio performance
assessment, and risk management techniques using derivatives. Prerequisites: Finance 301
and junior standing.
Fall semester only, three hours.
FNCE 334. INVESTMENT VALUATION. This course covers techniques used to assess
the investment merit of publicly traded debt and equity instruments. The course focuses on
various applications of fundamental and technical analysis. Students will use these
techniques to construct research reports and investment recommendations. They will also
provide a presentation based upon the results of their analysis. Prerequisites: Finance 301
and 332.
Spring semester only, three hours.
FNCE 341. FINANCIAL MODELING. This course equips students with knowledge of
fundamental financial models and ability to apply them using Excel. Such models cover
time value of money and stock valuation, portfolio management, option pricing, and bond
pricing. After this course, students are expected to use these models using Excel to solve
financial problems in these areas. Prerequisites: Finance 301 and 332.
Spring semester only, three hours.
FNCE 435. FINANCIAL PLANNING. This course provides a comprehensive exploration
of financial planning topics (in conjunction with the recommendation of the Academy of
Financial Services and the CFP Board of Standards) including the financial planning
process, client interactions, time value of money applications, personal financial statements,
cash flow and debt management, asset acquisition, education planning, risk management,
investment planning, retirement planning, special circumstances, plan integration, ethics,
and the business of financial planning. Prerequisites: Finance 301 and junior standing.
Spring semester only, three hours.
FNCE 436. CAPITAL MARKETS. This course explores the functions and operations of
money, capital, and derivatives markets. It addresses topics such as stock market efficiency,
financial market integration and globalization, as well as markets for venture and private
capital. The characteristics of various financial instruments that trade over-the-counter and
on organized exchanges will also be reviewed. Prerequisite: Finance 301.
Spring semester only, three hours.
FNCE 440. ADVANCED CORPORATE FINANCE. This course focuses on the
processes and procedures employed by financial managers to help ensure that actions taken
enhance shareholder value. Topics include applications of net present value and options
pricing models to capital budgeting decisions, techniques for determining the cost of capital,
valuation and performance measurement, mergers and acquisitions, and risk analysis and

90 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

management. This course will emphasize the use of spreadsheets for model building and
analysis. Prerequisite: Finance 301.
Fall semester only, three hours.
FNCE 462. INTERNATIONAL FINANCE. Knowledge of international finance is
essential as markets become increasingly globalized. This course focuses on financial issues
faced by both multinational corporate financial managers and individual investors with a
global perspective. Among these issues covered are foreign currency exchange, cultural
and regulatory differences between countries, international balance of payments, and
international financial markets. Prerequisites: Finance 301, International Business 205
(Global Business Issues), and one of the following: Finance 332, 334, or 440.
Fall semester only, three hours.
FNCE 480. INTERNSHIP IN FINANCE. This is an opportunity for finance majors to
participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer
and department faculty member. Most internships take place during the summer months.
Students will be graded based on an employer performance evaluation along with a written
paper and journal. Prerequisites: Good academic standing and completion of the freshman
year of study.
One to six hours.

Applied Science and Engineering
Dr. Richard N. Savage, Dean
Applied Science and Engineering is an inter-disciplinary program that emphasizes the
integration and application of engineering, scientific, and mathematical principles. It
focuses on the general application of mathematical and scientific principles to the analysis
and evaluation of engineering problems, including applied research in biomechanics,
statistics, public health, and technology management.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Applied Science and
Engineering—87 hours
Engineering Science Core Requirements (54 hours)
Biology 101; Chemistry 105; Electrical Engineering 210; Engineering 120, 156, 401,
402, 451, 452; Mathematics 161, 162; Mechanical Engineering 107, 109, 201, 211,
304; Physics 101, 102; Statistics 131.
Biomedical Engineering Concentration (33 hours)
Biology 233, 234; Engineering 274, 390, 413, 414; Exercise Science 253, 258, 309;
Mechanical Engineering 251, 252.
*other plans of study must be approved by the Interdisciplinary Study Review
Committee
Public Health Concentration: (33 hours)
Biology 233, 234, 310, 325; Exercise Science 134; Management 214; Public health
190, 290, 390; Statistics 132.
*other plans of study must be approved by the Interdisciplinary Study Review
Committee
Courses that count in the Applied Science and Engineering major quality point
average (MQPA):
All courses with “ENGR”; “BIOL”; “CHEM”; “PHYS”; “ELEE”; “MECE”;
“MATH”, “PUBH” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 91

Engineering Core Courses (ENGR)
ENGR 120. NUMERICAL COMPUTING FOR ENGINEERS. This course introduces
students to applied numerical computation, with an emphasis on solving typical engineering
problems. Sequential logic programming is taught using MATLAB. Topics include array
and scalar operators, program control elements, graphic and text I/O, internal and userdefined functions. Students are introduced to numerical methods such as root finding,
solutions to systems of linear equations, linear regression, and numerical integration and
differentiation. Corequisites: Mathematics 161 and Physics 101.
Semester course, three hours.
ENGR 130. INTRODUCTION TO C ENGINEERING. This course provides an
understanding of hardware and software concepts, structured program design, and
programming using C. Topics include basic data structures, control flow, functions, memory
allocation, threading, I/O, and manipulation of hardware components. Students will
program in a microprocessor environment and in a Linux environment.
Fall semester course, two hours.
ENGR 156. INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING. Introduces students to the
engineering profession and the design process. Course lectures and assignments include the
design process; problem definition and solution; oral and written communications; group
dynamics; public responsibility; current global engineering challenges; and engineering
ethics. A group design project is required. For Mechanical Engineering students, this course
is taken concurrently with ENGR 120.
Semester course, two hours.
ENGR 274. MATHEMATICAL METHODS IN ENGINEERING. A course for
engineering and science majors covering selected topics in probability and statistics, linear
algebra, discrete mathematics, and numerical methods as applied to the solution of problems
in engineering and science. Students who receive credit for Mathematics 213, 222, and 331
may not receive credit for Engineering 274. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.
Semester course, three hours.
ENGR 301. ETHICS IN ENGINEERING AND ROBOTICS. This course investigates
ethical decision-making from a Christian perspective as it applies to engineering and
robotics. It includes an overview of approaches to ethical decision-making, as well as
particular issues raised by the robotics field, such as robots making military decisions,
privacy issues with in-home robots, issues with emotional bonds, etc.
Semester course, one hour.
ENGR 304. DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS. Design of experiments for engineering design
optimization and analysis. An introduction to the statistically designed experimental
techniques commonly used by engineers for design and process optimization, including
ANOVA, factorial, CCD, Taguchi, and I-optimal designs. Prerequisite: Junior status or
permission of instructor.
Spring semester, one hour.
ENGR 305. INTRODUCTION TO LABVIEW. Introduction to LabVIEW. Presents the
fundamentals of the LabVIEW graphical programming environment. This visual
programming language is from National Instruments and is commonly used for data
acquisition, instrument control, and industrial automation. Students will gain a basic
understanding of LabVIEW programming practices and will develop LabVIEW
applications for data acquisition, data analysis, and real-time control.
Spring semester, one hour.

92 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

ENGR 331. ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT AND CROSS-CULTURAL
COMMUNICATION. Introduction to the tools needed to manage technical projects in an
international setting including (1) cross-cultural communication/management, with a
special emphasis on foreign vs. U.S. language/culture, and (2) selected introductory
engineering management and design process topics. Lectures and company case studies are
supplemented with cultural and engineering field trips. Open to all GCC students. This
course can be used to satisfy three technical elective credits in Mechanical and Electrical
Engineering. Prerequisite: Sophomore or higher standing in mechanical or electrical
engineering.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGR 390. SPECIAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in the areas of new
engineering development based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject
matter varies each semester with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of
registration.
Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
ENGR 401. CAPTSONE DESIGN SEQUENCE. Completion of a senior design project.
A study of the application of scientific and engineering principles towards a design problem
that impact societal needs. Including problem identification, detailed design solution,
fabrication, decision making, teamwork, engineering economics, analysis and verification
of performance, and societal impact. Prerequisites: Senior standing in Science or
Engineering.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ENGR 402. ENGINEERING ECONOMY. Principles and methods for analyzing the
economic feasibility of engineering projects including interest, depreciation, rate-of-return,
economic life, replacement costs, and comparison of alternative designs. Aspects of this
course will be involved in the final phase of Senior Capstone projects. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 141 or 161. Corequisite: Mechanical Engineering 452, Electrical Engineering
452, or Robotics 452.
Spring Semester Only, one hour.
ENGR 411. CONTROL SYSTEMS. A study of the design and analysis of feedback
control systems using classical techniques. Topics include modeling of mechanical and
electrical dynamic systems, a review of Laplace transform techniques, steady-state error,
transient response, stability, root locus design methods, Bode analysis/stability margins, and
Bode compensator design. Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations and hands-on projects.
Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 210 or 201; Mechanical Engineering 316 or Electrical
Engineering 321; and Engineering 274, Mathematics 214, or Mathematics 222.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGR 412. MODERN CONTROL THEORY. Analysis and design of feedback control
systems using modern control modeling and design techniques. Topics include state space
modeling of mechanical and electrical systems, design of state-space controllers and
observers, Kalman filtering, and an introduction to advanced topics such as robust control,
optimal control (LGR/LQG), and others. Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations and
hands-on projects. Prerequisite: Engineering 411.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGR 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN LABORATORY I. An advanced lab course requiring
the student to complete the senior group design project. For electrical engineering majors,
this will include performing experiments in control systems, digital communication
systems, and initiation of work with the senior design team. For mechanical engineering
majors, this will include 3-D computer-aided design and manufacturing techniques and
experiments related to the senior project. Written reports and oral presentations are

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 93

required. Engineering 451 is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Speaking Intensive
(SI) course for Engineering majors. Prerequisites: Senior standing in Engineering.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ENGR 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN LABORATORY II. An advanced lab course
requiring student teams to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral
presentations are required. Engineering 452 is designed to fulfill the requirements for
Speaking Intensive (SI) course for Engineering majors. Prerequisites: Senior standing
Engineering and ENGR 451.
Spring semester only, three hours
ENGR 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENGINEERING. An opportunity for junior or senior
engineering majors to participate in an extended work experience (six months or more)
under the supervision of an on-site manager and a department faculty member. Products of
the internship will include an evaluation by the on-site manager, a journal of the internship
experience, and a paper describing the experience and relating it to academic theory. This
course may be repeated a maximum of three times. Prerequisite: Permission from the
department chair.
Semester course, one hour.

Public Health (PUBH)
PUBL 190. FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH. This course provides an
introduction to public health, a discipline that strives to improve the health of the community
through community-based action. The course covers the history of public health and
provides insight into the methods used to measure community health, communicable
diseases, chronic and lifestyle diseases, family health, nutrition and food safety,
environmental health. The course provides basic information related to the structure and
functioning of the community health system, including the identification and examination
of programs, providers, and current problems associated with the delivery of health services.
The course also describes the U.S. national health care system, underserved groups, public
health law and ethics, and the future of public health. Prerequisites: College level biology
course (BIOL 101 or SCIC 202).
Fall semester only, three hours.
PUBH 290. INTRODUCTION TO EPIDEMIOLOGY. Epidemiology is the study of
health and disease of populations. In this course, students will learn methods used by
epidemiologists to elucidate relationships between various types of exposures and positive
or negative health outcomes; they will also explore methods to trace and predict disease
patterns. This course introduces population-based statistical methods of inquiry regarding
distribution and determination of disease in human populations. It emphasizes appropriate
study design, investigative techniques, and interpretation of findings related to community
health. Examples of disease outbreaks and investigations are provided throughout the
course. Prerequisites: Biology 101 or SCIC 202; and one of Statistics 131 or Psychology
201.
Fall semester only, three hours.
PUBH 390. ENVIRONMENTAL AND OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH. Environmental
health explores the ecologic, economic, ethical, toxicologic and epidemiologic bases for
disease and illness within the community setting. The course will address current issues in
the assessment of environmental exposures among populations and the recognition of risk
among various populations. The practical application of local, state, and federal public
health law in controlling environmental exposures to biological, physical, and chemical
agents for the protection of the population’s health will be discussed. Prerequisite Public
Health 190.
Spring semester only, three hours.

94 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy
Dr. Byun, Chair; Dr. Campbell, Assistant Chair; Dr. Ansberry, Dr. Bibza, Dr. Franklin,
Dr. Hall, Dr. Kemeny, Dr. Moeller, Dr. Robbins, Dr. Shepson, Dr. Trueman, Dr. West.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Biblical and Religious Studies—
36 hours
Core Requirements (15 hours)
Religion 211*, 212*, 217, 218, and 488.
* Students who have already completed HUMA 102 may substitute one RELI 237
and one RELI 238 for these courses.
Practical Theology Elective (3 hours)
Choose one course from Religion 248, 320, Christian Ministries 238, or 248.
Biblical Studies Electives (6 hours)
Choose two courses from Greek 202, Hebrew 202, Religion 221, 232, 235, 237,
238, 325, or 390 Travel-Israel. Students may complete Religion 237 or 238 more
than once, choosing a different topic each time.
Historical Studies Elective (3 hours)
Choose one course from History 349, Religion 341, 345, or 390 TravelReformation.
Theological Studies Elective (3 hours)
Choose one course from Religion 247, 248, 261, 317, 330, or 362.
Additional Major Electives (6 hours)
Choose two courses from Religion 255, 450, Sociology 308, or any additional
Religion course not counting elsewhere. Students may complete Religion 237 or
238 more than once, choosing a different topic each time.
Courses that count in the Biblical and Religious Studies major quality point average
(MQPA):
All courses with “RELI” prefix, GREK 202; HEBR 202; HIST 349. A minimum MQPA
of 2.00 is required to graduate.
The Department intends that Biblical and Religious Studies majors develop
information literacy as well as speaking and writing skills be best prepared for graduate
school and/or a vocation. To this end, all Biblical and Religious Studies majors will take
Religion 488 Senior Seminar during their senior year as a Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking
Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) course. This course is designed to help gain
proficiency in research as well as clear and well-supported written and oral communication.
The Department offers courses in New Testament Greek and Biblical Hebrew. These
courses may partially fulfill the College’s foreign language requirement. See the General
Education and Degree Programs section for details.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Christian Ministries—36 hours
Core Requirements (24 hours)
Religion 211*, 212*, 217; Christian Ministries 112 or 122, 238, 258, 321, and 480.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 95

* Students who have already completed HUMA 102 may substitute one RELI 237
and one RELI 238 for these courses.
Christian Ministry Electives (9 hours)
Choose nine hours from Christian Ministries 228, 248, 313, 322, 361, 412, and
486.
Religion Electives (3 hours)
Choose three hours from Religion 237, 238, 247, 248, 255, 320, or 390 Travel:
Israel.
Courses that count in the Christian Ministries major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “CMIN” and “RELI” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required
to graduate.
The Department desires that Christian Ministries majors receive some practical field
experience in ministry during their four years of academic instruction and practical training
at Grove City College. To this end, all Christian Ministries majors must complete a threecredit ministry internship (CMIN 480) during their time at Grove City, some completing the
internship during the summers and others during a fall or spring semester. While students
must complete three credit hours of CMIN 480 Internship in Christian Ministries as part of
their Christian Ministries major, students may complete three additional hours of internship
as part of the 128 hours needed to graduate from Grove City College (up to six hours of
internship total). Students should consult with their academic advisor, as well as the
department internship coordinator, for more information on internship requirements.
The Department intends that Christian Ministries majors develop information literacy
as well as speaking and writing skills in order to be best prepared for a vocation in
professional ministry and/or graduate school. To this end, all Christian Ministries Majors
will take Religion 212 New Testament Literature and History as an Information Literacy
(IL course) and Christian Ministries 258 Communicating the Gospel as a Writing Intensive
(WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI). These courses are designed to help students gain
proficiency in research, as well as clear and well-supported written and oral communication
for both academic and practical ministry application.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Philosophy—33 hours
Core Requirements: (30 hours)
Philosophy 161 or 191, 201 or 211, 231, 232, 233, 311, 312, 313, 314, and 488.
Major Electives: (3 hours) Choose one course from:
Philosophy 201, 211, 243, 256, 271, 290, 340, 390, 470, Political Science 205, 355,
356, or Religion 261. Note: One of Philosophy 201 or 211 may be used to fulfill the
Major Elective. The other may fulfill the Core Requirement.
Courses that count in the Philosophy major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “PHIL” prefix, POLS 205, POLS 355, POLS 356, and RELI 261. A
minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Developing information literacy and writing skills in the study of Philosophy involves
gaining proficiency in doing research on great philosophical thinkers and ideas sufficient
for the writing of clear, well-supported research and critical analysis papers in the major.
Professional speaking skills are also essential in preparing Philosophy students for graduate
school and/or a career. To this end, the required course Philosophy 380 Current Problems

96 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

in Philosophy will be designated as the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and
Information Literacy (IL) course.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Biblical Interpretation (12 hours)
Students majoring in Biblical & Religious Studies can earn a concentration in Biblical
Interpretation by completing twelve hours from Religion 235, 237, 238, 351, or 460. Note:
Courses completed for the concentration must be taken beyond the course requirements for
the major.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Biblical Languages (12 hours)
Students majoring in Biblical & Religious Studies can earn a concentration in Biblical
Languages by completing twelve hours from Religion 237, 238, 460, or any Greek or
Hebrew courses. Note: Courses completed for the concentration must be taken beyond the
course requirements for the major.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Historical & Theological Studies (12
hours)
Students majoring in Biblical & Religious Studies can earn a concentration in
Historical & Theological Studies by completing twelve hours from Religion 247, 248, 261,
330, 341, 345, 362, History 341, or 349. Note: Courses completed for the concentration
must be taken beyond the course requirements for the major.
Course Requirements for a minor in Biblical and Religious Studies (18 hours)
A minor in Biblical and Religious Studies will consist of any eighteen hours of
Religion, Greek and/or Hebrew courses.
Course Requirements for a minor in Christian Ministry (21 hours)
A minor in Christian Ministry will consist of Christian Ministries 122, 238, 480 (3
hours); Religion 217; and nine additional hours from Christian Ministries 228, 248, 258,
313, 321, 322, 361, 412, Religion 237, 238, 248, 255, or 320.
Taken in conjunction with any major, the Christian Ministry minor aims to help students
prepare for vocational opportunities oriented toward "people-service." The Christian
Ministry plan can accompany any college major and requires a specialized group of
Christian Ministries courses in addition to those courses required for the major which the
student chooses.
Course Requirements for a minor in Philosophy (18 hours)
A minor in Philosophy will consist of Philosophy 161 or 191, Philosophy 201 or 211,
and twelve additional hours of Philosophy courses. A maximum of three credits of
independent study in Philosophy may count toward the minor. Political Science 205 may
also count toward this minor.
Course Requirements for a minor in Political Philosophy and Theology (18 hours)
A minor in Political Philosophy and Theology will consist of Political Science 355,
356; and 12 hours from Philosophy 191, 314, 340, 488, Political Science 350, 354, 357, or
Religion 362.
Course Requirements for a minor in Youth Ministry (21 hours)
(Restricted to non-Christian Ministry majors only)
A minor in Youth Ministry will consist of Christian Ministries 112, 238, 258, 480 (3
hours); Religion 217; and six additional hours from Christian Ministries 122, 228, 248, 313,
321, 322, 361, 412, Religion 237, 238, 248, 255, or 320.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 97

Pre-Theological Concentration
Pre-theological students should plan their program with the help of the Chair of the
Department of Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Religion (RELI)
RELI 211. OLD TESTAMENT LITERATURE AND HISTORY. An introduction to the
literature, content, and history of the Old Testament. Special attention is given to the
historical background, composition, and theological message of the Old Testament. The
course further acquaints students with the basic methods of Old Testament studies and the
present state of Old Testament research.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 212. NEW TESTAMENT LITERATURE AND HISTORY. An introduction to
the literature, content, and history of the New Testament. Special attention is given to the
historical background, composition, and theological message of the New Testament. The
course further acquaints students with the basic methods of New Testament studies and the
present state of New Testament research. This course contains the second component of the
general education Information Literacy (IL) requirement for students substituting Religion
211 and 212 for the Humanities 102 requirement.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 217. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. An introduction to the methods of systematic
theology in terms of narrative, covenant and creed, and an examination of the central
doctrines of historic Christianity, including Revelation and Scripture, the being and
attributes of God, Humanity, the Person and Work of Christ, the Person and Work of the
Holy Spirit, the Christian Life, the Church and the Sacraments, and the Last Things.
Fall semester only, three hours.
RELI 218. INTERPRETING THE BIBLE. An introduction to the skills necessary for
understanding a Biblical passage’s meaning in each Bible genre. Skills addressed will range
from establishing the text, comparing translations and observing the text, to rules for proper
interpretation, to applying the text to Christians today accurately. Advanced skills will also
be taught, including mastering a Bible book, legitimately finding Christ in (even Old
Testament) Biblical texts, typology, and dealing with difficult texts.
Spring semester only, three hours.
RELI 220. CHRISTIANITY AND THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF LIFE.
The course concerns some of the fundamental questions such as: What is a good person?
What is a good life? What is a good society? What is/are the human problem(s)? How do
we understand human nature? What is the Christian view of justice, right and wrong, good
and evil? Not all of these questions will be addressed in every class. Answers to these
questions will involve a study of the Christian tradition of politics, including the Bible and
contemporary interpreters, although not all of these sources will be utilized in every class.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 221. THE LIFE OF CHRIST. This course aims to give the student a good
understanding of the person, work, and teachings of Christ as presented in the Gospels. It
also seeks to introduce the student to some of the important literature on the subject.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 232. THE LIFE AND WORK OF PAUL. A study of the life and work of the apostle
Paul, author of almost one-half of the New Testament. Attention is given to both the

98 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

descriptive material in the book of Acts and the thematic material from the Pauline Epistles.
Students are introduced to current issues in the study of Paul.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 235. BIBLICAL IDEAS. This course will draw together Biblical, systematic, and
pastoral/practical theological styles and methods. In doing so, the class will expose students
to some of the great concepts of the Bible such as the fear of the Lord, the call to care for
the elderly, fasting, tithing and the Sabbath. Along with this, the class will equip students
with basic Biblical studies skills needed for their own continuing theological reflection in
the years to come. Prerequisites: One of Humanities 102 or Religion 211 and 212.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 237. OLD TESTAMENT BIBLICAL BOOKS. This course will examine the
genre, themes, theology, and practical application of one Old Testament book. The Old
Testament book studied will differ each semester.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 238. NEW TESTAMENT BIBLICAL BOOKS. This course will examine the
genre, themes, theology, and practical application of one New Testament book. The New
Testament book studied will differ each semester.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 246. CHRISTIAN EDUCATION FOR YOUTH AND ADULTS. This course
intends to aid persons who plan to lead youth and adults in the Christian education
environment. It will include a consideration of objectives; of historical, theological, and
psychological background of methods and programming resources; and of techniques for
outreach.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 247. CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN RELIGION. This course seeks to examine
and explore the prominent place of religion in this religiously pluralistic nation by
describing and analyzing current American religious developments in historical,
sociological, and theological perspective. Institutional and non-institutional developments
within and outside the Judeo-Christian tradition will also be examined.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 248. WORLD RELIGIONS. An introduction to the major living religions, to the
leading problems of religious thought, and to the alternative approaches of world religions
to ultimate questions concerning the meaning of human life. Semester course, three hours.
RELI 251. LEADERSHIP IN CHRISTIAN MINISTRIES. This course concentrates on
the leadership, organization and administration of the programs and activities of the local
church and the many “parachurch” organizations. Sound principles or servant leadership are
emphasized in a context of biblical teaching.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 253. PHILOSOPHY OF MINISTRY. Scripture, history, culture, and sociology
play significant roles in the formulation of a philosophy of ministry. This course seeks to
help the student understand how these factors affect the various fields of ministry.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 255. DEFENDING THE FAITH. This course will investigate evidential,
presupposition, postmodern, and other approaches to apologetics. The emphasis will be on
the epistemological stance one should take in apologetic encounters. A portion of this course
will focus on responses to various objections and concerns that one is likely to face in
apologetic encounters.
Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 99

RELI 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in religion.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
RELI 261. C.S. LEWIS: CHRISTIAN APOLOGIST. A study of one of contemporary
Christianity's greatest apologists. The primary subject of study is Lewis' unique
contributions to apologetics including his epistemology, view of myth, and defense of
supernaturalism. Various examples of Lewis' writings are examined from selected essays
and theological articles and the Chronicles of Narnia.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in religion. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
RELI 290. STUDIES IN RELIGION. The subject matter for this course will vary each
semester to allow for the introduction of new courses in the field of religion. The aim of
such a course is in-depth study of some specific facet of religion with particular emphasis
on the relationship of religion and contemporary life.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 317. THE DOCTRINE OF GOD. This course examines how the church formulated
the classical, creedal doctrine of God, and how this was subsequently developed. Particular
attention will be paid to primary texts and to the manner in which theology proper (the
doctrine of God) also had implications both for Christology and for the way in which the
church read the Bible. It will also address the reasons why classical theism has been
challenged in recent times, and will culminate in a discussion of the importance of the
recovery of classical theism in the church today. Above all, the course’s watchword will be
the notion lex credendi est lex orandi - the rule of believing is the rule of praising - and will
seek to connect doctrine with praise.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 320. THEOLOGY OF MISSIONS. A survey of the greatest evangelistic and
mission movements in history, the Biblical-theological basis for missions, and
contemporary developments in mission strategy.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 325. BIBLICAL THEOLOGY OF WORSHIP. This course will discuss the sacred
places, people, offerings and festivals of the Old Testament and their relation to the New.
The class traces the redemptive-historical development of forms of worship from the Garden
of Eden to the exilic period and beyond into the New Testament. The focus of the course
will be primarily exegetical, interacting with the Biblical materials rather than with
historical-critical approaches. The goal of the course is to form a solid Biblical basis from
which to address the issues of worship which face the contemporary church.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 330. THEOLOGY OF THE SPIRITUAL LIFE. This course examines writings on
spiritual formation from an historical, theological, and Biblical perspective. Key topics
include the holiness of God, the person and work of the Holy Spirit, prayer, Bible Study,
and the discernment of God's will.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 341. CHRISTENDOM AND REFORM. A study of the history of Christianity from
the time of Charlemagne until the end of the Religious Wars in 1648, this course will explore
Christianity throughout the Medieval Period, as tensions and then schism arose between the
Greek and Latin Churches, and then go into the Reformation era with its various callings
for reform of the Western Church. Emphasis will be placed on important persons and ideas,

100 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

movements of significance, and the relationship of the Christian mission to surrounding
culture.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 345. LUTHER AND CALVIN. This course focuses on the Reformation leaders
whose work and ideas shaped Protestantism. Primary sources will be used.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 351. HERMENEUTICS. A study of central issues of Biblical interpretation that
bear directly on current concerns of human existence. This course examines the import and
implications of the Biblical literature.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students with
previous background in religion to do intensive independent study of specialized topics.
Prerequisites: Twelve hours of religion coursework, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor.
Semester course, one to three hours.
RELI 362. CONTEMPORARY THEOLOGY. A study of major themes in contemporary
theology including such topics as religious language, views of God, meaning of man and
redemption, and the problem of evil. These topics are discussed as they relate to
contemporary cultures and worldviews.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
RELI 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in religion. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
RELI 390. ADVANCED STUDIES IN RELIGION. The subject matter for this course
will vary each semester to allow for the introduction of new courses in the field of religion.
The aim of such courses is in-depth study of some specific facet of religion with particular
emphasis on the relationship of religion and contemporary life.
Semester course, three hours.
RELI 450. CHRIST AND THE MEDIA. This course provides an historical survey and a
Biblical-Theistic interaction with how human media shape the social environment and
structure human thought. Taught as a seminar, students read and discuss Plato, Ong,
Postman, McLuhan, and others who have contributed to understanding of orality, literacy,
image, and electronic media.
Fall semester only, three hours.
RELI 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students with
previous background in religion to do intensive independent study of specialized topics.
Prerequisites: Twelve hours of religion coursework, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor.
Semester course, one to three hours.
RELI 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in religion. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
RELI 480. INTERNSHIP IN RELIGION. This course offers practical experience
appropriate for the Christian Ministries auxiliary field. Prerequisites: Consent of the
department chair.
Semester course, one to six hours.
RELI 488. SENIOR SEMINAR. This course satisfies the Writing Intensive (WI),
Speaking Intensive (SI), Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the Biblical and

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 101

Religious Studies major, and will be taken in the fall of the senior year. Topics will focus
on a major issue in biblical studies, church history, or systematic theology.
Fall semester only, three hours.
RELI 499. HONORS COURSE IN RELIGION. Advanced research in Biblical and
Religious Studies is available to students on an individual basis and by prearrangement with
the department.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Christian Ministries (CMIN)
CMIN 112. INTRODUCTION TO YOUTH MINISTRY. This course will offer a broad
overview of the field of youth ministry. This will include vocational questions, a brief study
of ecclesiology, a survey of adolescent developmental issues, a consideration of ministry
philosophies and programming approaches, and some important practical questions related
to pastoral ethics and spiritual health.
Alternate years (even), fall semester only, three
hours.
CMIN 122. INTRODUCTION TO CHRISTIAN MINISTRIES. This course will
introduce the student to the principles of Christian Ministry in contemporary society.
Particular attention will be placed on biblical foundations of Christian education, Youth
Ministry, para-church ministries, the local church, history of Christian education, and the
educator as the agent of change.
Alternate years (odd), fall semester only, three hours.
CMIN 228. CHRIST AND CULTURE. This course will survey some of the broad
contours of culture, as well as how these cultural realities impact the way we "live and move
and have our being..." (borrowed from Acts 17:28). Aside from exploring the cultural
landscape, this course will focus on three essential questions: 1. What is the nature of our
engagement as Christians with a culture that is not Christian? 2. How are we to exegete and
respond to products and artifacts produced by the culture? 3. How do we communicate the
gospel into the language and context of another culture not our own?
Spring semester only, three hours.
CMIN 238. SPIRITIUAL FORMATION. This course serves as a core course for the
Christian Ministry major. It is designed to be a reflective, interactive, and deeply shaping
course in our lives as we pursue an understanding of holistic spiritual formation. The
purpose of this course is to equip students in both the theory and practice of spiritual growth
and development. This course focuses on our personal relationship with God. We will seek
to develop an understanding of the necessary aspect of personal spirituality for ourselves
through evaluation of Scripture and through self-reflection and discipline. Particular
attention will be given to the psychology of faith and religion and to the influences of home
and family on the development of faith.
Fall semester only, three hours.
CMIN 248. DISCIPLESHIP AND EVANGELISM. The course will address the
theology, ministry, and implementation of biblical evangelism and discipleship. There will
be various exposures to evangelism and discipleship methodology which will require the
integration of various projects, guest lecturers, small-group assignments, and possible field
trips. Emphasis will be placed on strategies for contemporary culture, youth culture, and
other ministry contexts such as urban ministry and the mission field.
Spring semester only, three hours.
CMIN 258. COMMUNICATING THE GOSPEL. This course is designed to train
students in the concepts and skills necessary to effectively communicate from the scripture.
This phase of the Christian Ministry curriculum will focus on general communication skills,
sermon design, preaching technique, with special emphasis on teaching and preaching the

102 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Word of God. This course satisfies the Writing Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI)
requirements for the Christian Ministries major.
Fall semester only, three hours.
CMIN 313. NATIONAL YOUTH WORKERS CONFERENCE. This course is a
National Youth Workers’ Convention-based learning experience, exploring the latest
research and trends in the discipline of Youth Ministry. The experience is maximized with
university-based pre-readings and follow-up evaluation and discussion. Students will: 1.
Develop a background in current youth ministry trends and research; 2. Engage in dialogue
with a wide spectrum of reflective youth ministry professionals; 3. Demonstrate skills in
learning, reflecting upon, and applying new youth ministry concepts; 4. Progress toward a
pattern of continuing ministry and professional education.
Alternate years, fall semester only, one hour.
CMIN 321. LEADERSHIP AND MINISTRY ADMINISTRATION. This course will
focus on some of the nuts and bolts areas of every-day ministry in the parish and parachurch
setting. It is a course about ministry behind the scenes. So often we think of ministry as what
happens “in the front of the room.” But authentic leadership has to extend to, and attend to,
the “dirty work” that makes possible what happens “in the front of the room.” This course
explores that “dirty work,” and attempts to prepare students for precisely those behind-thescene tasks that help define the role of a servant-leader. Topics will include leadership,
decision-making, staff relationships, budgeting, legal issues, team leadership, evaluation.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
CMIN 322. PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF PREACHING AND TEACHING. In
this practical laboratory course, designed to give students repeated practice in the skill of
communicating the truths of Scripture, students will investigate and develop teaching and
preaching skills. The course will review biblically-based and ministry related
communication approaches to discern appropriate goals for biblical instruction, and work
to understand how people learn in order to build a strong foundation in both the theory and
practice of communication. Students will be offered numerous opportunities to sharpen their
skills in teaching, sermon preparation and delivery. Prerequisite: Christian Ministries 258.
Spring semester only, three hours.
CMIN 361. WORSHIP AND PRAYER MINISTRY. This course examines corporate and
private worship and prayer, following the Bible’s storyline concerning subjects from
Genesis to the book of Revelation. We will establish biblical and theological principles
which inform the practice of worship and prayer in the modern church and personal piety.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
CMIN 412. BIBLICAL COUNSELING. This course equips the student with pastoral care
and counseling methods and skills within a ministry context, including counseling various
generations (children, youth, adults, and family). It covers an overview of psychological
disorders, adolescent and family developmental and crisis issues, pre-, inter-, and postmarital counseling, family counseling, and methods of spiritual direction.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
CMIN 480. INTERNSHIP IN CHRISTIAN MINISTRIES. This course is designed to
serve as an important practical field experience for students majoring in Christian Ministry.
This experience provides broad-based exposure to all ministry and operational facets of any
number of Christian ministry programs, whether those be in parish ministry or para-church
ministry. The intent is to provide each student with a full-time placement in his or her area
of study and/or concentration. In general, each student will assume an approved internship

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 103

assignment in a local church or parachurch organization, minister in that position for a
minimal number of hours, fulfill a number of core and specialization experiences, complete
reading and reflection assignments, and evaluate the internship experience. Prerequisites:
Christian Ministries 122, 238, and 258.
Semester course, three to six hours.
CMIN 486. ISSUES IN CONTEMPORARY MINISTRY. This course will examine
various topics related to ministry preparedness: calling, ministry readiness and leadership,
current cultural/biblical exegesis, and caring for one’s own soul. We will review biblical
and theological principles which inform the practice of ministry.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.

Greek (GREK)
GREK 101. INTRODUCTION TO NEW TESTAMENT GREEK I. A study of the
grammar and syntax of New Testament Greek.
Fall semester only, three hours.
GREK 102. INTRODUCTION TO NEW TESTAMENT GREEK II. Continuation of
Greek 101. Prerequisite: Greek 101 or permission of the instructor.
Spring semester only, three hours.
GREK 201. READINGS IN NEW TESTAMENT GREEK I. Portions of the Gospels
will be read. Vocabulary, grammar, and syntax are reviewed. Prerequisites: Greek 101 and
102; or permission of the instructor.
Fall semester only, three hours.
GREK 202. READINGS IN NEW TESTAMENT GREEK II. Portions of the Pauline
Epistles will be read. Vocabulary, grammar, and syntax are reviewed. Prerequisites: Greek
101, 102, and 201; or permission of the instructor.
Spring semester only, three hours.
GREK 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Greek.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GREK 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Greek. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GREK 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third and fourth-year students
to do independent projects in basic New Testament exegesis, word study, or classical Greek.
Prerequisites: Greek 201 and 202; or consent of instructor.
Semester course, two or three hours.
GREK 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Greek. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GREK 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third and fourth-year students
to do independent projects in basic New Testament exegesis, word study, or classical Greek.
Prerequisites: Greek 201 and 202, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, two or three hours.
GREK 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Greek. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

104 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Hebrew (HEBR)
HEBR 101. INTRODUCTION TO BIBLICAL HEBREW I. A study of the grammar
and syntax of the Hebrew Bible.
Fall semester only, three hours.
HEBR 102. INTRODUCTION TO BIBLICAL HEBREW II. Continuation of Hebrew
101. Prerequisite: Hebrew 101 or permission of the instructor.
Spring semester only, three hours.
HEBR 201. READINGS IN BIBLICAL HEBREW I. Portions of Narrative Literature
will be read. Vocabulary, grammar, and syntax are reviewed. Prerequisites: Hebrew 101
and 102; or permission of the instructor.
Fall semester only, three hours.
HEBR 202. READINGS IN BIBLICAL HEBREW II. Portions of the Prophets will be
read. Vocabulary, grammar, and syntax are reviewed. Prerequisites: Hebrew 101, 102, and
201; or permission of the instructor.
Spring semester only, three hours.
HEBR 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Hebrew.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HEBR 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Hebrew. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HEBR 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third- and fourth-year Hebrew
students to do independent projects in basic Old Testament exegesis. Prerequisite: Hebrew
201 and 202; or permission of the instructor.
Semester course, two or three hours.
HEBR 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Hebrew. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HEBR 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third- and fourth-year Hebrew
students to do independent projects in basic Old Testament exegesis. Prerequisite: Hebrew
201 and 202; or permission of the instructor.
Semester course, two or three hours.
HEBR 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Hebrew. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Latin (LATN)
LATN 101. ELEMENTARY LATIN I. This is the beginning course of the elementary
Classical Latin sequence. It assumes no previous knowledge of Latin. Students cover the
fundamentals of Latin grammar and syntax while building a basic vocabulary. They will
begin to read Latin in sentences and edited short selections.
Offered infrequently, semester course, three hours.
LATN 102. ELEMENTARY LATIN II. This course continues the study of Classical Latin
grammar and syntax while continuing to build an extensive Latin vocabulary. It emphasizes
the student’s ability to read basic unedited Latin prose and poetry.
Offered infrequently, semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 105

LATN 201. INTERMEDIATE LATIN I. This course is designed to increase the student’s
facility in reading Latin prose and poetry from various eras—the Republic, the Empire and
Late Antiquity. Strong emphasis is placed on accuracy and efficiency in translation.
Offered infrequently, semester course, three hours.
LATN 202. INTERMEDIATE LATIN II. Further study of Latin prose and poetry to
develop proficiency in reading and translating Latin. The focus will be on extensive readings
from select Latin authors from antiquity and the Middle Ages.
Offered infrequently, semester course, three hours.
LATN 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Latin.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
LATN 290. STUDIES IN LATIN. Readings and discussion of topics in literature or
language. Subject matter varies.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
LATN 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third- and fourth-year students
to do independent projects in Latin. Prerequisite: Latin 201 and 202; or permission of the
instructor.
Semester course, two or three hours.
LATN 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for third- and fourth-year students
to do independent projects in Latin. Prerequisite: Latin 201 and 202; or permission of the
instructor.
Semester course, two or three hours.

Philosophy (PHIL)
PHIL 161. INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY. A course designed to acquaint the
student with the various fields and problems of philosophy. Primary sources are used.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 191. INTRODUCTION TO ETHICS. An introductory study of philosophical
issues related to the moral life, such as: What should we love? How should we treat each
other, and why? What does it mean to be a good person, and how might we become better
people? and What is human life about, ultimately? Attention will be given to the insights of
principle figures in the history of ethics from the ancient period to the present.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 201. SYMBOLIC LOGIC. A study of formal deductive logic with emphasis on
testing arguments for validity and translating English statements into symbolic notation.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 211. GENERAL LOGIC. A study of reasoning in a variety of contexts. Attention is
given to both inductive and deductive arguments. Many kinds of fallacies are studied as
well as traditional syllogisms and logical puzzles. Diagramming techniques are developed.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 231. ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY. A survey of Western philosophy from the early
Greeks through the beginning of the Christian era. Special attention will be given to the
philosophies of Plato and Aristotle. Primary sources are used.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
PHIL 232. MEDIEVAL PHILSOPHY. A study of the thought of prominent philosophers
from St. Augustine to Ockham, addressing issues such as the nature and existence of God,

106 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

theories of the good life, and the project of synthesizing Christianity with pagan philosophy.
Primary sources are used.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
PHIL 233. MODERN PHILOSOPHY. A survey of Western philosophy from Descartes
through Kant, addressing issues pertaining to epistemology (especially the problems of
certainty, philosophical methodology, and knowledge of God), and metaphysics (especially
the nature of God, free will, and the immortality of the soul). Primary sources are used.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
PHIL 243. SCIENCE AND THE HUMAN: INQUIRY, DESIGN AND THE PERSON.
This course will examine historical and contemporary discussions of the nature of scientific
inquiry and scientific knowledge, and related questions in the philosophy of science. It will
also examine philosophical issues connected with design in nature, origins, and current
technological development. Prerequisites: Humanities 102 (or Religion 211 and 212) and a
lab science. The lab science may be taken concurrently with this course. This course satisfies
the College’s SSFT General Education requirement.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 256. GOD, SUFFERING, AND NARRATIVE. A philosophical investigation into
the problem of suffering-the problem of reconciling an all-powerful, all-knowing, and
perfectly good God with the existence of horrendous evils-with a focus on understanding
the differences between argument and narrative as sources of knowledge, the varieties of
knowledge, the nature of God and evil, union with God, the relationship between love and
the will, the fragmentation of the human self, and the biblical narratives of Abraham and
Job. Other works of literature may be used. Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
PHIL 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
philosophy. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PHIL 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in philosophy. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PHIL 271. BIO-MEDICAL ETHICS. An introduction to the ethical issues arising in the
field of biomedicine. Topics covered include issues such as abortion, eugenics, euthanasia,
organ transplantation, behavior control, the right of a patient to refuse treatment, etc.
Sophomore, junior, or senior standing is required.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 290. STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY. The subject matter for this course will vary each
semester to allow for the introduction of new courses in the field of philosophy.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 311. METAPHYSICS. Metaphysics examines such basic questions as “What is
real?” “What is the nature of basic reality?” and “What is the nature of human beings?” This
course will examine some influential discussions of metaphysics arising from these basic
questions. Some topics we may discuss include the nature of identity, the relationship
between mind and body, free will, and other topics that arise in answering basic
metaphysical questions.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 312. EPISTEMOLOGY. Epistemology is the study of the nature and limits of
human knowledge, understanding and rationality. Questions covered in this course may
include “What is knowledge” “What gives a person a good reason for his/her beliefs?”

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 107

“What are the limits of human understanding and rationality?” and “What does it mean to
achieve excellence in intellectual pursuits?”
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 313. ETHICS. The central question of ethics is “How should we live?” This course
examines several theories concerning the norms governing human life. Topics may include
the nature of happiness, the role of virtue in a life well lived, the relationship between moral
rules and right action, the functions of reason and the passions in practical rationality and
more.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
PHIL 314. PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION. A sustained philosophical reflection on the
nature and existence of God, addressing questions such as the rationality of belief in God,
the role of evidence in religious belief, the problem of evil, the moral and cognitive
significance of religious experience, and the relationship between God and morality.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
PHIL 340. PHILOSOPHY OF LAW. This course commonly examines such topics as the
nature of law, the relationship of law to morality, the problem of judicial interpretation,
justice, and rights.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
PHIL 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for sophomore and junior students
with previous background in philosophy to do intensive independent study of specialized
topics. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.
PHIL 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in philosophy. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PHIL 390. ADVANCED STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY. The subject matter for this
course will vary each semester to allow for the introduction of new courses in the field of
philosophy.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students with
previous background in philosophy to do intensive independent study of specialized topics.
Prerequisite: Twelve hours of philosophy coursework, permission of the department chair,
and a faculty sponsor.
Semester course, three hours.
PHIL 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in philosophy. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PHIL 488. PHILOSOPHY SEMINAR. This course is taught in a seminar style with
student-led discussions, a focus on close readings of philosophical works, and a major
research project. The course may be repeated, as topics covered vary by semester. This
course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy
(IL) requirement for the Philosophy major. Prerequisite: Philosophy 161 or 191, Philosophy
201 or 211, and six hours of Philosophy courses above the 211 level; or permission of the
instructor.
Semester course, three hours.

108 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Biology
Dr. Antoszewski, Chair; Dr. Dudt, Dr. Farone, Dr. Jenkins, Dr. Pazehoski, Dr. Stauff, Dr.
Wood, Dr. Yowler. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mrs. Strain.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Biology—52 hours
Biology Core (18 hours):
Biology 101, 102, 180 or 182, 233, 234, and 488.
Groups (18 hours):
Choose one course from each of the following groups, as well as additional courses
from any group to reach a minimum of 18 hours. Your group course section must
include a minimum of three 4-credit lab courses.
Group 1: Molecular Mechanisms and Physiology
Biology 301, 302, 322, 325, 334, 346, and 407.
Group 2: Vertebrate Systems
Biology 310, 313, 314, and 341.
Group 3: Natural History
Biology 305, 323, 326, and 409.
Group 4: Environmental and Ecological Diversity
Biology 320, 328, 331 and 332, 403, and 421.
Additional Group Course
Complete one additional course from the groups outlined above.
Biology Electives (4 hours):
Choose four hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the College Bulletin
for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors research requires
a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester).
Major-related requirements (12 hours):
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114; and Mathematics 161.
Courses that count in the Biology major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Biology and General Science
Secondary Education Certification—100 hours
Biology Core (17 hours):
Biology 101, 102, 233, 234, and 486.
Groups (18 hours):
Choose one course from each of the following groups, as well as additional courses
from any group to reach a minimum of 18 hours. Your group course section must
include a minimum of three 4-credit lab courses.
Group 1: Molecular Mechanisms and Physiology
Biology 301, 302, 322, 325, 334, 346, and 407.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 109

Group 2: Vertebrate Systems
Biology 310, 313, 314, and 341.
Group 3: Natural History
Biology 305, 323, 326, and 409.
Group 4: Environmental and Ecological Diversity
Biology 320, 328, 331 and 332, 403, and 421.
Additional Group Course
Complete one additional course from the groups outlined above.
Biology Electives (3 hours):
Choose three hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the College Bulletin
for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors research requires
a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester).
Major-related requirements (22 hours):
Astronomy 206 or 207; Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114; Geology 201; Mathematics
161; and Science 201 and/or Physics 121 (both are recommended, but Science 201
may not follow Physics 121).
Education requirements (40 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Courses that count in the Biology and General Science Secondary Education
Certification major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for
additional details on teacher certification requirements.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Biology/Health—75 hours
Biology Core (18 hours):
Biology 101, 102, 182, 233, 234, and 488.
Groups (21-22 hours):
Health Group 1: Biology 334, 341, 346, and 407.
Health Group 2: Complete two courses from Biology 301, 310, 313, 314, 322 or 325.
Biology Electives (9-10 hours):
Choose nine to ten hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the College
Bulletin for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors
research requires a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester).
Major-related requirements (26 hours):
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 241; Mathematics 161; Physics 121; Psychology 201;
and one of Psychology 101 or Sociology 101.
Courses that count in the Biology/Health major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.

110 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

This major is designed for those students interested in careers in medicine or allied
health fields, including medical doctor, doctor of osteopathy, physical therapy, physician’s
assistant, nursing, veterinary medicine, optometry, dentistry, and others, while retaining
strong general biology training. This major requires courses that are prerequisites for many
allied health graduate programs.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Conservation Biology—72
hours
Biology Core (18 hours):
Biology 101, 102, 180, 233, 234, and 488.
Groups (28-29 hours):
Conservation Group 1: Biology 305, 320, 326, 328, and 331 and 332.
Conservation Group 2: Complete three courses from Biology 323, 403, 409, or 421.
Biology Electives (13-14 hours):
Choose thirteen to fourteen hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the
College Bulletin for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors
research requires a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester).
Major-related requirements (12 hours):
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114; and Mathematics 161.
Courses that count in the Degree in Conservation Biology major quality point average
(MQPA):
All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
This major is designed to serve those students interested in careers in wildlife and
natural resource management, or graduate study in the ecological, environmental,
organismal or science fields, and others. This major requires courses that are prerequisites
for many environmental, conservation biology, resource management, or other fieldoriented career paths.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Molecular Biology—72 hours
Biology Core (18 hours):
Biology 101, 102, 180 or 182, 233, 234, and 488.
Groups (15 hours):
Molecular Group 1: Biology 301, 302, and 407.
Molecular Group 2: Biology 314, 322 or 325.
Biology Electives (11 hours):
Choose eleven hours from any additional Biology offerings. See the College Bulletin
for Biology offerings not listed above. Note: Independent or honors research
requires a minimum two-semester commitment (one credit per semester).
Major-related requirements (28 hours):
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 241, 242, 351, and 352; and Mathematics 161.
Courses that count in the Molecular Biology major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “BIOL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 111

This major is designed to serve those students interested in careers in biochemical,
molecular, genetic, or cellular biology fields. This major requires courses that are
prerequisites for many graduate programs in biochemistry, molecular biology, and related
graduate programs.
Course Requirements for a minor in Biology (22 hours)
A minor in Biology will consist of Biology 101, 102, 233, 234; and six hours from
Biology 301, 302, 305, 308, 310, 313, 314, 320, 322, 323, 325, 326, 327, 331, 334, 341,
346, 372, 390, 403, 407, 409, or 421.
The Biology curriculum seeks to develop academic competency and professional
awareness, to encourage meaningful integration between the biological sciences and other
dimensions of life, and to promote lifelong learning skills in problem solving, research, and
communication. Writing-intensive, speaking-intensive, and information literacy skills are
developed by special assignments in core and seminar courses.
Departmental policy limits students to one major within the Department of Biology.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Biology (BIOL)
BIOL 101. GENERAL BIOLOGY I. The first course in a year-long introduction to the
unifying principles of biology. This semester includes discussion of the chemistry of life,
cells structure, energy, genetics, and physiology. Three lectures and one lab per week.
Fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 102. GENERAL BIOLOGY II. A continuing discussion of the unifying principles
of biology. Topics presented include: the diversity of life, kingdom plantae, animal
reproduction and behavior, evolution, and ecological interactions. Three lectures and one
lab per week.
Spring semester only, four hours.
BIOL 180. INTRODUCTION TO BIOLOGY (NON-HEALTH). This course is
designed to prepare freshman, biology (non-health) students for their careers. Students will
develop a professional portfolio, explore career options with their degree, learn about the
importance of internships, discuss memberships in professional organizations and ways to
optimize attendance at professional meetings/conferences. Furthermore, students will learn
about ways to balance their spiritual and professional life. Prerequisites: Biology 101; and
freshman status or permission from instructor.
Spring semester only, one hour.
BIOL 182. INTRODUCTION TO BIOLOGY – HEALTH. This introductory course is
designed to provide students with an understanding of the requirements and tools necessary
to succeed as a biology major who is looking forward to a career in any health field. This
course will cover a variety of topics designed to prepare students to be a competitive
candidate when applying to graduate health fields. Prerequisites: Biology 101, Freshman
status only or permission from instructor.
Spring semester. 1 credit.
BIOL 190. STUDIES IN BIOLOGY. Intensive examination of an area of biology not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.
Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
BIOL 207. GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY. This course will provide students with the
basic concepts and principles within the field of Microbiology, especially as they relate to
microorganisms and viruses that cause disease. Topics include an introduction to the major

112 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

classes of microorganisms and viruses, microbial nutrition and metabolism, the control of
microbial growth, and innate and adaptive immunity. Special emphasis will be placed on a
subset of medically important pathogens as a way of illustrating the importance of
understanding microbial physiology and pathogenesis as well as the prevention and control
of infection. The course is designed specifically for students who are interested in pursuing
a career in nursing. Prerequisite: Nursing Program majors only.
Fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 208. INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION. This course
introduces the scope of environmental education. Topics addressed will include history and
current trends, issue articulation and methodology, and development of problem-solving
and communication skills to address environmental issues. Learning competencies K-12
will be emphasized and reinforced by environmental project-learning experiences.
Alternate years, fall semester only, two hours.
BIOL 233. GENETICS. An exploration of modern genetics beginning with early 20th
century classical concepts as they relate to cells, organisms, and populations, continuing
through late 20th century genetics as the molecular basis for classical concepts, and
concluding with 21st century techniques and concepts including genomics and proteomics.
Three lectures and one recitation per week. Prerequisite: Biology 102.
Fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 234. CELL BIOLOGY. A focus on the organization and physiology of living cells
using a problem-solving approach to learning. Topics will include transcription and
translation, energy conversion, cell division, membranes, organelles, cytoskeleton, and cell
communication among others. The lab provides core experience with model cellular
systems and basic tools of biomolecular research. Three lectures and one lab per week.
Prerequisite: Biology 233.
Spring semester only, four hours.
BIOL 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in biology.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one to three hours.
BIOL 270. BIOLOGY RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in
biology. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
BIOL 290. STUDIES IN BIOLOGY. Intensive examination of an area of biology not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.
Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
BIOL 301. MEDICAL GENETICS. This course focuses on the genetic causes of disease.
A variety of diseases will be discussed, ranging from those caused by a single gene to very
complex polygenic diseases. Furthermore, genetic testing will be covered, along with newly
emerging therapeutic approaches to treating genetic diseases. The lab portion of the course
will involve the use of current DNA-analysis techniques, as well as off-campus visits to
clinical labs and lectures from practicing professionals. Three lecture hours and one lab per
week. Prerequisites: Biology 233 and 234.
Fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 302. DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY. Investigates major events in embryonic
development in animals including fertilization, cleavage, axis specification, gastrulation,
neurulation, and organogenesis. Classical and modern developmental techniques and
experiments will be discussed. Labs emphasize embryonic manipulation using multiple

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 113

model organisms in designed lab projects. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite:
Biology 234.
Alternate years, spring semester only, four hours.
BIOL 305. PLANT TAXONOMY. A study of plants in relation to their habitats, including
aspects of plant geography and taxonomy in the lecture portion and methods of plant
identification, collection, and preservation with emphasis on local flora in the lab portion.
Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 308. NEUROBIOLOGY. An investigation of a broad array of topics in
neurobiology, building on foundations of the Hodgkin-Huxley model of action potential,
synaptic transmission, and neuromodulation. Studies include processing of sensory
information in visual and auditory systems, the chemical senses, and others. The
connections between sensory integration and motor behaviors in diverse animals will be
explored. Neural mechanisms of learning and memory, sleep/wakefulness, and reward and
decision-making also will be addressed. Recommended for students considering a career in
research, health sciences, or psychology. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
BIOL 310. ZOONOTIC DISEASE AND PUBLIC HEALTH. This course offers a
unique opportunity to explore the pathological relationships that affect the health of animals
and man within the global community. General virology, bacteriology, parasitology, and
mycology will be discussed with special focus on the history, ecology, pathology, and
epidemiology of specific zoonotic diseases of current importance. Preventative medicine,
population and global health, and “One-Health” concepts will be discussed. This course has
special and timely importance in preparation for all pre-health professional careers.
Laboratory sessions may include field trips to local areas of public health interest as well as
guest speakers from the community. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite:
Biology 101 and 234. Biology 233 is suggested.
Alternate years, spring semester only, four hours.
BIOL 313. HISTOLOGY. This course offers a focused study of the normal tissues of
mammals from both a morphological and a functional view at a microscopic level. Selected
common tissue pathologies will also be introduced, discussed, and observed. Each student
gets experience in the preparation of fresh slides, as well as identifying all major body
tissues under the light microscope and utilizing virtual technology. Prerequisite: Biology
234.
Fall semester only, three hours.
BIOL 314. IMMUNOLOGY. An exploration of the mammalian immune system on a
cellular and molecular level. Beginning with a broad overview of concepts in immunology,
the course will explore in detail topics including pattern recognition, clonal selection and
deletion, immunological recognition at the molecular level, and lymphocyte development.
Lectures are supplemented with three-dimensional molecular modeling assignments.
Special topics include the etiology of autoimmune disease and immunoevasive strategies
employed by pathogens. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Summer online only, three hours.
BIOL 320. CONSERVATION AND WILDLIFE BIOLOGY. A comparative study of
representative vertebrates with emphasis on population dynamics, biodiversity,
morphological adaptation, wildlife conservation, and resource management. The lab
involves field identifications, aging, and morphological adaptations of representative
vertebrates. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Biology 102.
Spring semester only, four hours.

114 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

BIOL 322. THE BIOLOGY OF CANCER. This course focuses on the causes of cancer
and progression of the disease. The common features of all cancers will be discussed in
addition to the distinguishing characteristics of a subset of cancers. Throughout the course,
therapeutic targets will be identified, and novel therapeutic approaches will be considered.
Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Spring semester only, three hours.
BIOL 323. INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY. This course will provide students with a
comprehensive presentation to the major invertebrate phyla through a combination of
lectures and workshops. But because invertebrates comprise roughly 97% of animal species
on the planet, we will emphasize terrestrial invertebrates, especially live ones locally
available. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
BIOL 325. VIROLOGY. An exploration of the theoretical and experimental basis of
virology, with emphasis on mechanisms of virus replication, similarities and differences
among virus groups including medically important viruses, how viruses ensure their own
survival, and virus-host interactions including disease and host defenses. Two lectures per
week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
BIOL 326. EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY. The objectives of this course are to introduce
students to the theory of evolution, from the production and maintenance of genetic
variation to the formation of new species, to present a summary of the history of life on
earth, to familiarize students with the mechanisms of evolution, and the concepts of
speciation and of major innovations. The material explanation for the origins of life and
biological diversification will be examined in light of the Biblical doctrine of God’s
sovereignty in creation and process. Prerequisite: Biology 234 or permission of instructor.
Spring semester only, three hours.
BIOL 327. ESSENTIAL LITERATURE FOR BIOLOGISTS. This course is designed
to introduce students to the seminal works that serve as the foundation for the broad subfields of biology. Students will read twelve to fourteen books (or excerpts from books) and
critique those works in terms of their contribution to both modern biology and contemporary
society. Prerequisite: Biology 101 and 102; or permission of instructor.
Intersession course; periodically during regular semesters, three hours.
BIOL 328. FOUNDATIONS OF GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SCIENCE. This
course offers an introduction into geographic information science (GIS). The course will
focus on the foundational elements of spatial data analysis with students learning and
applying essential mapping skills within the ArcGIS® software, specifically demonstrating
the ability to acquire, manage, and analyze spatial data. The course will meet three times a
week and consist of both lecture and in-class software analysis. Prerequisite: Biology 102.
Fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 331. ECOLOGY. A study of responses of living systems to a changing environment
in relation to selected ecosystems with emphasis on the interrelations of individual,
population, community, and habitat. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Fall semester only, three hours.
BIOL 332. ECOLOGY LABORATORY. The application of ecological principles
through both field and lab investigations which quantify the dynamic relationships at an
individual, population, and community level. One lab per week. Course must be taken
concurrently with Biology 331. Prerequisite: Biology234, Corequisite: Biology 331.
Fall semester only, one hour

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 115

BIOL 334. BIOCHEMISTRY FOR BIOLOGY. This course covers all the major
principles in the field of biochemistry. Proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids are
studied within the themes of macromolecule structure & function, metabolic pathways, and
gene expression. Specific topics include oxygen binding proteins, enzyme catalysis,
membrane transport, synthesis/degradation pathways of carbohydrates, lipids, & amino
acids, and the informational pathways of DNA replication, transcription, & translation.
Prerequisites: Biology 101, 102, and Chemistry 241. No credit will be given to students who
have already received credit for Chemistry 351 or 352. Biology 334 does not fulfill the
biochemistry requirement for Biochemistry majors.
Spring semester only, three hours.
BIOL 341. HUMAN/MAMMALIAN ANATOMY. Gross and microscopic anatomy of
mammals will be explored with emphasis on humans. These holistic studies of the body will
include 11 major systems: integumentary, skeletal, muscular, circulatory, respiratory, renal,
digestive, reproductive, neurologic, endocrine, and lymphatic. This course illustrates normal
form and function principles and has special importance in preparation of the health-related
careers. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 346. HUMAN/MAMMALIAN PHYSIOLOGY. A study of the cellular basis for
vertebrate organ system function with emphasis on human physiology. Systems discussed
include muscle, nervous, endocrine, reproductive, urinary, digestive and cardiopulmonary.
Laboratory exercises will utilize physiology simulations, problem sets and hands-on
investigation. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Spring semester only, four hours.
BIOL 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for individual study of specialized
topics in the biological sciences. Prerequisite: Completion of at least eight credits in biology,
permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor.
Semester course, one to three hours.
BIOL 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. Course providing independent opportunity in
biological research under the supervision of a faculty mentor. Prerequisites: Completion of
at least eight credits in biology, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
BIOL 372. CONTEMPORARY TOPICS. This course presents an opportunity for
students to study a topic of particular interest to the faculty member offering the course.
Heavy focus will be placed on reading primary literature, understanding the history of the
field and discussing specific experiments and techniques which led to major findings in the
field. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Offered periodically, one hour.
BIOL 390. STUDIES IN BIOLOGY. Intensive examination of an area of biology not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.
Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
BIOL 403. BASIS OF WILDLIFE BEHAVIOR. A comparative study of the
physiological and ecological basis of animal behaviors and its interaction in the ecology and
management of wildlife populations. Emphasis is placed on the innate and learned behaviors
in disease transmission, and in the evolution and management of rural and urban wildlife
populations. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
BIOL 407. MICROBIOLOGY. An introduction to microorganisms, primarily bacteria
that cause disease in humans, which focuses on microbial structures, genetics, and life

116 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

cycles, and also delves into molecular pathogenesis mechanisms and interactions between
pathogens and the mammalian immune system. Two lectures and two labs per week.
Prerequisites: Biology 234 and Chemistry 111 and 113.
Fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 409. ENTOMOLOGY. A study of the class Insecta, including insect diversity, life
histories, morphology, physiology, behavior, ecology, and impact on human society. The
course includes a combination of lecture and lab components. The lab component includes
field excursions for collecting insects for display and anatomical/taxonomic investigation.
Course traditions include a black-light party and a bug feast. Three lectures and one lab per
week. Prerequisite: Biology 234.
Alternate years, fall semester only, four hours.
BIOL 421. AQUATIC AND FISHERY BIOLOGY. A study of freshwater and marine
ecosystems, including the impact of pollution on aquatic environments, water chemistry,
taxonomy of aquatic organisms, fisheries, and management of aquatic systems. Prerequisite:
Biology 234.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
BIOL 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for individual study of specialized
topics in the biological sciences. Prerequisites: Completion of at least eight credits in
biology, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor.
Semester course, one to three hours.
BIOL 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. Course providing independent opportunity in
biological research under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisites: Completion of
at least eight credits in biology, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
BIOL 480. INTERNSHIP IN BIOLOGY. Qualified upperclassmen may participate in
unpaid, individual off-campus experiences in research, medical, environmental, or other
approved settings under the guidance of both an on-site host supervisor and a Biology
faculty sponsor. Grade is dependent upon required update communication with the faculty
sponsor, written evaluation by the on-site supervisor, and submission of an internship paper
to the faculty sponsor. Prerequisites: Minimum rising sophomore status, minimum 8 credit
hours of biology, and permission of the department.
Summer or semester course, one to six hours.
BIOL 486. SEMINAR FOR BIOLOGY TEACHERS. Provides instruction in how to
prepare for and conduct effective biology learning experiences. Students will instruct
classmates through presentations, participate in Project WET training, and conduct research
using library/web resources. Students will also practice instruction in an actual classroom
or informal setting. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Information Literacy
(IL), and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for education majors in the Department of
Biology. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing education majors and acceptance into a
teacher certification program; or permission of instructor. Spring semester only, one hour.
BIOL 488. SEMINAR IN BIOLOGY. Required of all majors in the Department of
Biology except for those in teacher certification programs. Students will apply the
knowledge they have obtained in previous biology classes by writing a literature review on
a biological topic of their interest. Students will learn how to perform in-depth research of
scientific literature through the use of library/web resources and will gain experience in both
reading and critically evaluating peer-reviewed journal articles. Special emphasis will be
placed on the students’ participation in a peer-review process as they evaluate their peers’
papers. The class culminates with each student delivering a professional oral presentation
about their chosen topic. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Information

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 117

Literacy (IL), and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for majors in the Department of
Biology. Prerequisite: Senior standing.
Semester course, one hour.
BIOL 490. STUDIES IN BIOLOGY. Intensive examination of an area of biology not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.
Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
BIOL 499. HONORS IN BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH. Seniors who have shown special
aptitude in biology may undertake supervised biological research. Registration for the
honors course requires prior completion of an on- or off-campus research experience. A
research paper is required, and a public presentation is encouraged. Prerequisite: Senior
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor.
Semester course, one hour.

Geology (GEOL)
GEOL 201. PHYSICAL/ ENVIRONMENTAL GEOLOGY. A study of the internal and
external forces affecting the surface of earth and the distribution of geologic resources and
the environmental impacts on the extraction and use of these resources. This course is also
designed to relate the historical and current geologic activity to the local ecology and land
use planning.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.

Public Health (PUBH)
PUBL 190. FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH. This course provides an
introduction to public health, a discipline that strives to improve the health of the community
through community-based action. The course covers the history of public health and
provides insight into the methods used to measure community health, communicable
diseases, chronic and lifestyle diseases, family health, nutrition and food safety,
environmental health. The course provides basic information related to the structure and
functioning of the community health system, including the identification and examination
of programs, providers, and current problems associated with the delivery of health services.
The course also describes the U.S. national health care system, underserved groups, public
health law and ethics, and the future of public health. Prerequisites: College level biology
course (BIOL 101 or SCIC 202).
Fall semester only, three hours.
PUBH 290. INTRODUCTION TO EPIDEMIOLOGY. Epidemiology is the study of
health and disease of populations. In this course, students will learn methods used by
epidemiologists to elucidate relationships between various types of exposures and positive
or negative health outcomes; they will also explore methods to trace and predict disease
patterns. This course introduces population-based statistical methods of inquiry regarding
distribution and determination of disease in human populations. It emphasizes appropriate
study design, investigative techniques, and interpretation of findings related to community
health. Examples of disease outbreaks and investigations are provided throughout the
course. Prerequisites: Biology 101 or SCIC 202; and one of Statistics 131 or Psychology
201.
Fall semester only, three hours.
PUBH 390. ENVIRONMENTAL AND OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH. Environmental
health explores the ecologic, economic, ethical, toxicologic and epidemiologic bases for
disease and illness within the community setting. The course will address current issues in
the assessment of environmental exposures among populations and the recognition of risk
among various populations. The practical application of local, state, and federal public
health law in controlling environmental exposures to biological, physical, and chemical

118 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

agents for the protection of the population’s health will be discussed. Prerequisite Public
Health 190.
Spring semester only, three hours.

Chemistry
Dr. Augspurger, Chair; Dr. Cramer, Dr. DiStasi, Dr. Falcetta, Dr. T. Homan, Dr. Kriley,
Dr. Shaw, Dr. Wong. Additional Instructional Faculty: Dr. Bridger.
CHEMISTRY DEPARTMENT MISSION STATEMENT,
OBJECTIVES, AND OUTCOMES
The Department of Chemistry is traditional in its approach to the discipline of
chemistry and offers a rigorous and well-balanced curriculum. This provides the student
with a strong preparation for graduate studies and/or a career in chemistry. The department
faculty expertise covers all major areas of chemistry. A variety of research experiences are
available to majors through ongoing faculty research programs. In addition, the department
attempts to instill in its students an awareness of the beauty and design in nature that reflects
the creative hand of God.
There are four separate majors offered within the department:
• Chemistry: The traditional chemistry major provides a strong preparation for
graduate school or employment in the chemical industry.
• Biochemistry: This major provides a strong preparation for graduate or
professional schools or for employment in biochemical, molecular biology or
genetics industry.
• Chemistry Secondary Education Certification: This major prepares the student
for teaching chemistry at the secondary school level. It is a program that combines
a traditional chemistry curriculum with a number of education courses.
• Chemistry and General Science Secondary Education Certification: This is
essentially the same as Chemistry Secondary Education major. These students,
however, in addition to all the chemistry and education courses will take
Astronomy and either Geology or Environmental Science. This will qualify them
for General Science certification.
Success in the chemical profession requires the ability to search the chemical literature
and chemical databases and to effectively communicate that information in written and oral
form. Chemists need to be proficient with software designed to operate instruments, analyze
data and present results. The Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI) and
Information Literacy (IL) courses in the Chemistry Department are designed to fulfill these
academic and professional requirements.
Chemistry Department Program Objectives
Graduates will be prepared with the knowledge and technical skills to successfully
pursue career paths in the chemical industry, secondary education, chemistry graduate
studies or other professional programs.
Graduates will be prepared to display critical thinking and problem-solving skills to
enable them to learn, grow and be effective throughout their professional careers.
Graduates will gain knowledge and develop skills within the context of a Christian
worldview, including the Christian foundations of science and the practice of chemistry,
both ethical and in conduct, according to Christian principles.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 119

Chemistry Department Program Outcomes
Graduates of the Chemistry Department will demonstrate:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Knowledge in the areas of general, analytical, organic, physical, inorganic
chemistry and biochemistry according to ACS standards.
An ability to apply chemical principles and knowledge to solving chemical
problems.
Knowledge of the mathematical and physical basis of chemical theories.
An ability to use laboratory techniques and skills to effectively conduct
experiments and interpret results.
An ability to accurately maintain a laboratory notebook.
Proficiency in the operation of modern instrumentation and the ability to analyze
and interpret instrumental data.
An ability to search the chemical literature as well as read and comprehend content
in professional chemistry journals.
An ability to effectively communicate chemical information in written and oral
forms according to ACS guidelines.
Knowledge of the foundations and the practice of science from a Christian
perspective.

Departmental policy limits students to one major within the Department of
Chemistry.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Chemistry—75 hours
Chemistry Core (42 hours):
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 227, 231, 235, 241, 242, 245, 345, 346, 406, 422, 431,
and 488.
Chemistry Concentration (10 hours):
Choose one of the following six options:
• No concentration: choose any 10 hours of Chemistry electives from the choices
below.
• ACS Certified: Chemistry 351, 463; and four hours of Chemistry electives from
the choices below.
• Biochemistry: Chemistry 351, 352 and two hours of Chemistry electives from the
choices below.
• Computational Modeling: Computer Science 220, 222; Chemistry 445, 471 and
eight hours of Chemistry electives from the choices below. Note: This
concentration requires 18 hours of study.
• Forensic Chemistry (18 hours): Statistics 131 or Psychology 201; Chemistry
151, 408; Chemistry 351 or 4 hours of Chemistry electives from the choices below;
and two courses from Psychology 315, Sociology 233, or Sociology 314.
• Physical Chemistry: Chemistry 441, 445 and six hours of Chemistry electives
from the choices below.
• Synthetic Chemistry: Chemistry 453, 458 and six hours of Chemistry electives
from the choices below.
Chemistry Electives: Chemistry 351, 352, 441, 445, 453, 458, 463, and 466.
Major-Related requirements (23 hours):
Computer Science 141 or 155; Mathematics 161, 162, and 261; and Physics 101-102
or 121-122.

120 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Courses that count in the Chemistry major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “CHEM” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Chemistry Secondary
Education Certification—102 hours
Chemistry Core (38 hours):
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 227, 231, 235, 241, 242, 345, 346, 351, 402, and 488.
Major-Related requirements (24 hours):
Mathematics 161, 162, and 261; Physics 101-102 or 121-122; and Science 202.
Education requirements (40 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Courses that count in the Chemistry Secondary Education Certification major quality
point average (MQPA):
All courses with “CHEM” and “EDUC” prefixes, PSYC 102, and SEDU 102, 103. A
minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. Students should reference the Department
of Education’s section of the Bulletin for more details on teacher certification requirements.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Chemistry and General
Science Secondary Education Certification—108-109 hours
Chemistry Core (38 hours):
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 227, 231, 235, 241, 242, 345, 346, 351, 402, and 488.
Major-Related requirements (30-31 hours):
Astronomy 206 or 207; Geology 201 or Science 204; Mathematics 161, 162, and
261; Physics 101-102 or 121-122; and Science 202.
Education requirements (40 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Courses that count in the Chemistry and General Science Secondary Education
Certification major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “CHEM” and “EDUC” prefixes; ASTR 206 and 207; GEOL 201;
SCIC 202, 204; PSYC 102; and SEDU 102 and 103. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required
to graduate. Students should reference the Department of Education’s section of the Bulletin
for more details on teacher certification requirements.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Biochemistry—74 hours
Biochemistry Core (55 hours):
Chemistry 111, 112, 113, 114, 227, 231, 235, 241, 242, 342, 351, 352, 451, 487;
Biology 101, 102, 233, and 234.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 121

Major-Related requirements (19 hours):
Mathematics 161, 162; Physics 121-122 or 101-102; and Psychology 201.
Courses that count in the Biochemistry major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “CHEM” and “BIOL” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Chemical Synthesis (8 hours)
Students majoring in Biochemistry can earn a concentration in Chemical Synthesis by
completing Chemistry 422, 431, 453, and 458.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Forensic Chemistry (11 hours)
Students majoring in Biochemistry can earn a concentration in Forensic Chemistry by
completing Chemistry 151, 408, and two courses from Psychology 315, Sociology 233, or
Sociology 314.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Health (11-12 hours)
Students majoring in Biochemistry can earn a concentration in Health by completing
Biology 341 or 346; Biology 407; and one of Biology 313, 314, 325, 341, or 346.
Course Requirements for a minor in Chemistry (24 hours)
A minor in Chemistry will consist of Chemistry 111 and 113, or 105; Chemistry 112
and 114; Chemistry 227 and 241; and eight hours from Chemistry 231, 242, 245, 342, 345,
346, 406, or 431.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Chemistry (CHEM)
CHEM 105. CHEMISTRY FOR ENGINEERS. An introductory survey in the
fundamental principles of chemistry, including chemical reactions and equations; behavior
of gases; chemical thermodynamics; basics of electrochemistry; crystal structure; and
nuclear, organic, and environmental chemical fundamentals. Students who have earned
credit for Chemistry 105 may not subsequently receive credit for Chemistry 111 or 113.
Three lectures and one lab per week.
Fall semester only, four hours.
CHEM 111. GENERAL CHEMISTRY I. The first semester of a year-long introduction
to the fundamental principles of chemistry, including stoichiometry, nomenclature, basic
reactions (solubility, acid-base and oxidation reduction), gas laws, Laws of
Thermodynamics (enthalpy, entropy, Gibb’s free energy and equilibrium constant),
electronic structure, bonding, molecular structure, properties of pure liquids and solids, and
solutions. Three lectures per week. No credit will be given to students who have already
received credit for Chemistry 105.
Fall semester only, three hours.
CHEM 112. GENERAL CHEMISTRY II. The completion of the introductory survey of
the fundamental principles of chemistry which begins in Chemistry 111. Topics covered
include concepts and theories of rates of reaction, chemical equilibrium, aqueous equilibria,
electrochemistry, coordination chemistry, nuclear chemistry, descriptive main group
chemistry, and an introduction to organic chemistry. Three lectures per week. Prerequisite:
Chemistry 111 or 105.
Spring semester only, three hours.

122 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

CHEM 113. GENERAL CHEMISTRY LAB I. This course will develop laboratory skills
in measurement, use of volumetric glassware and titration. Students will learn to use visible
spectrometers, calorimeters, and data probes to record results on their computers. They will
be exposed first-hand to concepts in CHEM 111 like solubility, acid-base neutralization, gas
laws and colligative properties. Pre- or Co-requisite: Chemistry 111.
Fall semester only, one hour
CHEM 114. GENERAL CHEMISTRY LAB II. Students will continue to refine lab skills
begun to develop in Chemistry 113. They will be exposed first-hand to concepts from
Chemistry 112 including kinetics, acid-base behavior, electrochemistry and enthalpy of
reaction. A working knowledge of the following instruments will also be expected by the
end of the semester: bench top GC, pH data probes, digital multimeter and Spectronic 20.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 113. Pre- or Co-requisite: Chemistry 112.
Spring semester only, one hour.
CHEM 151. INTRODUCTION TO FORENSIC SCIENCE. This course provides an
overview of the field of forensic science and will cover scientific principles and their
application in the analysis of crime scene evidence. Topics covered will include glass and
soil, microscopy, bloodstains, hair, fibers fingerprinting and firearms. Three lectures per
week.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
CHEM 190. STUDIES IN CHEMISTRY. This course is used to present various
introductory topics in chemistry.
Semester course, one to three hours.
CHEM 227. ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY. A study of the theoretical basis and
laboratory techniques necessary for the solution of problems in quantitative chemical
analysis. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 112 and 114.
Fall semester only, four hours.
CHEM 231. DESCRIPTIVE INORGANIC/BIOINORGANIC CHEMISTRY. A
survey of descriptive inorganic and bioinorganic chemistry. The course is designed to give
students an introduction to main group inorganic chemistry, bioinorganic chemistry, and
molecular symmetry/group theory. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 112 and
114, or 105.
Spring semester only, two hours.
CHEM 235. CHEMISTRY IN CONTEXT. Building on the foundation of General
Chemistry, topics include current issues in chemistry, research and career opportunities,
ethics and the integration of the Christian faith, researching the chemical literature and an
introduction to modern instrumentation. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL)
requirement for majors in the Department of Chemistry. Prerequisite: Chemistry 112 and
114.
Fall semester only, one hour.
CHEM 241. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I. An introduction to the structure and chemistry
of carbon compounds including alkanes, stereochemistry, haloalkanes, alcohols, ethers and
alkenes. Structure determination by spectroscopic methods is introduced. Three lectures and
one lab per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 112 and 114.
Fall semester only, four hours.
CHEM 242. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II. A continued study in the chemistry of organic
compounds including alkynes, conjugated systems, aromatic compounds, aldehydes and
ketones, carboxylic acids and their derivatives, amines and biological molecules. Structure
determination by spectroscopic methods is emphasized. Three lectures and one lab per
week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 241.
Spring semester only, four hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 123

CHEM 245. INTRODUCTION TO MOLECULAR MODELING. An introduction to
the application of molecular modeling to the structure, reactivity and spectra of molecules.
The focus will be on what can be accomplished using presently available computational
chemistry programs and how to use the programs to accomplish these tasks. The theoretical
background of the techniques and algorithms is treated from a user’s perspective,
emphasizing practical impacts of various choices the user can make in choosing
methodology. Students apply the techniques covered in class to small chemical systems and
compare results of various approximations. Two lectures per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry
241 and Mathematics 161.
Spring semester only, two hours.
CHEM 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
chemistry. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
CHEM 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in chemistry. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
CHEM 330. INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL MEDICNE. This course introduces the
practice of clinical medicine by practicing physicians, integrating studies in biology,
chemistry, mathematics, and physics in application to a future health career. Students will
learn how to take basic medical histories, perform a general physical examination, and begin
to develop differential diagnoses for various disease processes. The course will examine
clinical medicine through a detailed examination of the body’s major systems including the
cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, nervous, and hematological
systems. Prerequisites: Chemistry, Biology or Exercise Science majors with junior or senior
standing or by permission of instructor. One evening per week.
Fall semester only, one hour.
CHEM 342. PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS. An overview
of physical chemistry with particular application to life sciences. Topics include
thermodynamics, equilibrium, kinetics, molecular motion, molecular spectroscopy,
molecular structure and modeling. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 241 and Mathematics 162.
Spring semester only, four hours.
CHEM 345. MICROSCOPIC PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY: QUANTUM
MECHANICS AND SPECTROSCOPY. An introduction to the principles of quantum
mechanics and their application in describing molecular properties. An emphasis is placed
on developing a solid understanding of the principles of spectroscopy and electronic
structure. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry 231 and
Mathematics 261.
Fall semester only, four hours.
CHEM 346. MACROSCOPIC PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY: STATISTICAL
MECHANICS, THERMODYNAMICS, AND KINETICS. The relationships between
the properties of macroscopic systems are developed to gain an understanding of chemical
equilibrium. The principles of statistical mechanics are introduced to show how
thermodynamic properties can be predicted from molecular properties described by
quantum mechanics. Connections are developed between chemical kinetics and reaction
mechanisms. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry 112 and 114,
or 105; and Mathematics 261.
Spring semester only, four hours.
CHEM 351. BIOCHEMISTRY I. An introduction to the molecular forces, equilibria and
macromolecules that comprise living organisms. Emphasis is placed on proteins as the

124 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

enzymatic catalysts of metabolism and the central role of carbohydrates in intermediary
metabolism. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 242.
Fall semester only, four hours.
CHEM 352. BIOCHEMISTRY II. A continued study of the molecular forces, equilibria
and macromolecules that comprise living organisms. Emphasis is on the structures and
biological roles of lipids, proteins and nucleic acids. There is also a focus on experimental
methods and related molecular technologies. Three lectures and one lab per week.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 351.
Spring semester only, four hours.
CHEM 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
chemistry. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
CHEM 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. Juniors who have displayed aptitude in
chemistry perform assigned research problems. This course may not be taken concurrently
with Chemistry 499. Three hours of laboratory work per week per credit hour. Junior
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one or two hours.
CHEM 390. STUDIES IN CHEMISTRY. This course is used to present various advanced
topics in chemistry.
Semester course, one to three hours.
CHEM 402. TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY CLASSROOM AND LABORATORY
INSTRUCTION. A course limited to Chemistry Secondary Education (CSED) and
General Science Secondary Education (CGSE) majors involving instruction and experience
in setting up and conducting effective educational chemistry demonstrations and
laboratories. Students will also gain experience in scientific lecture preparation, including
multiple lecture opportunities both in the classroom and laboratory settings. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 227 and 241.
Alternate years, fall semester only, two hours.
CHEM 406. INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS. A course focused on instrumental theory,
methods and design, and the application of modern instrumentation in chemical analysis.
Two lectures and two labs per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 227; Recommended:
Chemistry 346.
Spring semester only, four hours.
CHEM 408. FORENSIC CHEMISTRY. This course will provide students exposure to
the processing and analysis of forensic samples. Students will learn how to quantitatively
analyze sample collections used as evidence in the crime lab, structure and organize lab
reports and interpret data to be used for evidence. In addition, analytical methods including
chromatography, mass spectroscopy, absorbance spectroscopy, fingerprint identification
and microscopy used in forensic applications will be covered. One lecture and 4-hour lab
per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 227. Corequisite Chemistry 406.
Alternate years, spring semester only, two hours.
CHEM 422 INORGANIC SYNTHESIS LABORATORY. This course involves the
synthesis and physical characterization of inorganic and organometallic compounds of main
group and transition metal compounds. Two labs per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry 231
and 242; Corequisite: Chemistry 431.
Fall semester only, two hours.
CHEM 428. ORGANOMETALLIC CHEMISTRY. A study of the synthesis and
properties of organometallic compounds and their role in modern catalytic processes. The

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 125

rapidly growing areas of bioinorganic and bioorganometallic chemistry is discussed. Three
lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 421.
Offered infrequently, three hours.
CHEM 431. ADVANCED INORGANIC/ORGANOMETALLIC CHEMISTRY. An
in-depth study of transition metal chemistry. The relationships between the symmetry of
molecules and their physical and chemical properties will be explored, as well as the role
that organometallic compounds play in modern catalytic processes. Two lectures per week.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 231; and Chemistry 342 or 345. Fall semester only, two hours.
CHEM 441. CRYSTAL STRUCTURE ANALYSIS. An introduction to the principles of
x-ray crystallography. Theory of x-ray diffraction will be covered in addition to instruction
on selecting, mounting, analyzing, refining and determining structures of various crystals.
Students will learn to operate a bench-top x-ray instrument and become proficient with the
operational and analysis software. Prerequisite: Chemistry 231.
Alternate years, fall semester only, two hours.
CHEM 445. ADVANCED COMPUTATIONAL CHEMISTRY. Computational
chemistry methods are used today in such diverse fields as neuroscience, pharmaceuticals,
interstellar chemistry, and catalysis. This course will build upon the introduction to
molecular modeling presented in Chemistry 245 and focus on ab initio methods of
calculating properties and interactions of small molecules to solve chemical problems.
Practical use of commercial software will constitute a major component of the students’
assessment. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 245 and Corequisite: Chemistry
345; or Prerequisite: Chemistry 245, 342, and Mathematics 162.
Alternate year, Spring semester only, two hours.
CHEM 451. BIOCHEMISTRY: DATA AND ANALYSIS. A continued study of the
macromolecules of living systems, their structures and the methods used to elucidate those
structures. Emphasis is placed on the generation, analysis and presentation of data from a
variety of experimental approaches with special consideration given to the unifying theme
of computer aided data analysis. Three lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 352.
Fall semester only, three hours.
CHEM 453. ADVANCED MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY. A study in modern
spectral analysis for the determination of molecular structure, including advanced topics
involving mass spectrometry, infrared spectrometry, and multiple pulse NMR techniques
such as 2-dimensional NMR. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 242.
Spring semester only, two hours.
CHEM 458. ADVANCED SYNTHESIS LABORATORY. This course is designed to
give the student a broad range of advanced synthetic laboratory experiences. The course
covers the synthesis of a wide range of organic, inorganic, and organometallic compounds
involving specialized techniques typical of a research environment. Two labs per week.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 242.
Spring semester only, two hours.
CHEM 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
chemistry. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
CHEM 463. POLYMER CHEMISTRY. An introduction to the structure, synthesis, and
physical properties of the major organic polymers. Two lectures per week. Prerequisite:
Chemistry 242.
Fall semester only, two hours.

126 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

CHEM 466. ADVANCED ORGANIC CHEMISTRY. A detailed study of organic
reactive intermediates and organic reaction mechanisms. Two lectures per week.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 242.
Alternate spring semesters, two hours.
CHEM 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. Seniors who have displayed aptitude in
chemistry perform assigned research problems. This course may not be taken concurrently
with Chemistry 499. Three hours of laboratory work per week per credit hour. Prerequisite:
Chemistry 370, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one or two hours.
CHEM 471. COMPUTATONAL CHEMISTRY PROJECT. This course serves as the
capstone to the computational modeling concentration in the chemistry major. A student
will design and complete a computational chemistry project under the supervision of a
faculty member. Prerequisites: Chemistry 245, 345, and Computer Science 141.
Offered periodically as needed, one or two hours.
CHEM 480. INTERNSHIP IN CHEMISTRY. Selected students participate in an
individual field experiences in a research laboratory under the supervision of professional
staff. Minimum two weeks work required per intern credit hour. The grade is determined
on the basis of a written evaluation by the cooperating institution mentor and a written report
by the student submitted to the Chemistry Department. Prerequisites: Minimum 24 hours in
chemistry and permission of the department.
Semester course, one to six hours.
CHEM 487. BIOCHEMISTRY SEMINAR. This course includes faculty directed
reading, analysis, and discussion of the biochemical literature. The course also involves indepth research, written paper, and oral presentation of an approved topic selected by the
student. Senior status in the department required for enrollment. This course fulfills the
Writing Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the Biochemistry
major.
Spring semester only, one hour.
CHEM 488. CHEMISTRY SEMINAR. This course includes faculty directed reading,
analysis, and discussion of the chemical literature. The course also involves in-depth
research, written paper, and oral presentation of an approved topic selected by the student.
Senior status in the department required for enrollment. This course fulfills the Writing
Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for majors in the Department of
Chemistry.
Fall semester only, one hour.
CHEM 499. HONORS IN CHEMICAL RESEARCH. Seniors who have shown special
aptitude in chemistry may, with consent of the Department of Chemistry, undertake
supervised chemistry research. Not to exceed two hours each semester.
Semester course, one or two hours.

Communication and Visual Arts
Dr. Miller, Chair; Mr. Mucha, Director of Design and Visual Arts; Mr. Bandy, Ms. Barrios.
Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. Catanese, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Sanders.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Communication Arts—36 hours
Communication Arts Core (15 hours):
Communication Arts 104 or 109 (total of three hours), 135, 212, 215, and 225.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 127

Communication Arts Electives (21 hours):
Media & Design (6 hours):
Two courses from Communication Arts 245, 277, 359, 378, 388, Design 101, 102,
201, or 210.
Culture & Theory (6 hours):
Two courses from Communication Arts 222, 240, 250, 304, 352, 362, 444, 427.
Professional & Technical (6 hours):
Two courses from Communication Arts 235, 300, 303, 305, 405, 406, 459, or Art
320.
Capstone Elective (3 hours):
Choose three hours from Communication Arts 470, 480, 488, or 499.
Courses that count in the Communication Arts major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “COMM” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Recommended Electives:
The required courses and electives provide the graduating student a strong foundation
for a career in professional communication, graduate study in communication, or more
effective performance in the career of his/her choice. Additional recommendations include
two-years of language study at the college level and a minor in an area of interest including
Design, English, Entrepreneurship, International Business, International Studies,
Management, Marketing, Psychology, Sociology, or Theatre. Students are encouraged to
discuss their vocational interests with their advisors so they can design a tailored plan for
their program of study.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Design and Innovation—63
hours
Design and Innovation Core (36 hours):
Design 101, 102, 201, 202, 207, 210, 301; Communication Arts 135;
Entrepreneurship 101, 104, 201; and Marketing 104.
Design and Innovation Major Electives (27 hours):
Communication Arts Electives (9 hours):
Choose three courses from Communication Arts 104, 303, 406, 470, 480, or any
300- or 400-level Communication Arts courses.
Entrepreneurship Electives (9 hours):
Choose three courses from Entrepreneurship 309, 328, 330, 409, 470, 480, or any
300- or 400-level Entrepreneurship courses.
Marketing Electives (6 hours):
Choose two courses from Marketing 415, 417, 419, or 420.
Capstone Elective (3 hours):
Choose one course from Design 401 or 480.
Courses that count in the Design and Innovation major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “DESI”, “COMM”, “ENTR”, and “MARK” prefix. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.

128 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

The faculty in the Department of Communication and Visual Arts is committed to
providing the opportunities Communication Arts majors and other students need to excel in
oral, written, and visual communication. For success in today’s society, information literacy
is also a critical skill. To these ends, Communication Arts 104 is designated as a Speaking
Intensive (SI) course; Communication Arts 212 and Communication Arts 427 are designed
as Writing Intensive (WI) courses; and Communication Arts 212 address the key issues
involved with Information Literary (IL) and are designated as such. These courses include
learning experiences that are designed to prepare Communication Arts majors to be
effective and ethical producers and consumers of knowledge.
SUPPORTING ACTIVITIES
The Department of Communication and Visual Arts offers students significant cocurricular activities, including:
• The Speech and Debate Team, which participates in both individual events and group
debate.
• American Institute of Graphic Arts (AIGA) student group.
• Involvement with The Collegian (campus newspaper), WSAJ (radio station), The
Echo (literary magazine), The Quad (quarterly magazine), The Bridge (yearbook),
or the College’s Office of Marketing and Communications.
• Internships, whereby students earn academic credit for work done in conjunction
with a professional organization related to communication (e.g., local newspaper,
radio, or television station). See the course description for Communication Arts 480.
Course Requirements for a minor in Communication Arts (18 hours)
A minor in Communication Arts will consist of Communication Arts 104 or 109 (total
of 3 hours); one theory course from Communication Arts 215, 222, 304, or 305; and 12
additional hours from any courses with COMM prefix. The one credit course, Theatre 259,
may be repeated, and a maximum of three hours may count toward the minor. A
Communication Internship (Communication Arts 480) may not count as an elective course
toward the minor.
Course Requirements for a minor in Design (21 hours)
A minor in Design will consist of Design 101, 102, and 15 hours of Design courses
Course Requirements for a minor in Studio Art (21 hours)
A minor in Studio Art will consist of one 2D Art course from Art 101, 105 or 121; one
3D Art course from Art 103, 104 or 111; one Art History course from Art 201 or 202; and
12 additional hours from Art 101, 103, 104, 105, 111, 121, 201, 202, 207, 208, 290, 320,
390, Design 101, 102, or 210.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Communication Arts (COMM)
COMM 104. PUBLIC SPEAKING AND RHETORIC. Introduces students to the
preparation and presentation of material for a variety of public speaking situations. This
performance-oriented class offers instruction in the theory of rhetoric, material
development, and delivery techniques. Students will review the historical importance of oral
communication and the role it plays in society. This course fulfills the Speaking Intensive
(SI) requirement for Communication Arts majors.
Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 129

COMM 109. FORENSICS. A skills-based course designed to improve students’ ability to
analyze ideas, advocate ideas in individual debate, and to prepare and deliver oral
communications. Students will develop and refine their ability to research, organize, and
present orally ideas in the form of informative, critical, and persuasive speeches, LincolnDouglas style debates, or individual performances of literature in the form of oral
interpretation of literature. May be taken up to three times.
Semester course, one hour.
COMM 135. WRITING FOR THE MEDIA. Provides an introduction to the substance,
structure, and style of multiple forms of non-narrative mass media including print,
broadcast, film, and the Internet.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 212. RESEARCH METHODS IN COMMUNICATION. Examines the
fundamentals of research approaches and methods in communication studies, both
qualitative and quantitative. The course also examines a variety of actual communication
research studies across the breadth of the field from interpersonal to mass communication.
Students will learn questionnaire design and interviewing techniques. This course, along
with Communication 427, fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI) requirement, fulfills the
Information Literacy (IL) requirement for Communication Arts majors. Prerequisite:
Communication Arts 215.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 215. PRINCIPLES OF MEDIA. This course offers an introduction of the
historical and conceptual foundations of media, including oral, print, photographic,
broadcast, cinematic, and digital cultural forms and practices. Drawing upon a comparative
approach, students will examine the nature of mediated communication, the functions of
media, and the history of transformations in media and the institutions that help define
media’s place in society.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 222. FILM HISTORY AND THEORY. Encompasses the history of the motion
picture from its invention in 1895 to the present day, focusing on American film.
Introduction to film theories and criticism including principles of aesthetics and the art of
how a film is created, from concept to completion.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 224. MEDIA, RELIGION AND DEMOCRACY. Explores a variety of questions
and problems related to the mass media in a democracy. Questions related to media control,
government regulation of media, political economy, journalistic “objectivity”, and the
advertising-editorial dichotomy are included. Christian reactions and religious activism
related to the media are discussed. Chomsky, Herman, McChesney, Postman and other
critical theorists are studied.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 225. INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION. Provides an overview of the
study of communication and culture. Course content focuses primarily on the theory and
practice of communication in intercultural contexts. Students will examine cross-cultural
communication (communication across cultures) and intercultural communication
(communication between members of different cultures). This course is especially suited to
students whose future careers may involve travel overseas or business with non-native
Americans.
Semester course, three hours.

130 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

COMM 235. JOURNALISM. Reviews a variety of print and broadcast media, exploring
editorial style and slant. Fundamental newsgathering and news writing skills will be studied
and practiced. Students will gather information from campus, community, and research
sources in order to develop hard news, feature, and in-depth stories. Ethical and legal issues
will be explored as well as the role of print media in shaping current events.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 240. MEDIA CRITICISM. An introduction to theoretical approaches and
practices used to analyze the content, structure, and context of media in society. Primary
attention will be paid to how the fundamental elements of media combine to create meaning
and tell stories, the forms media texts make, and the way these structures influence
viewers/listeners/users. The course will also explore what media is and why various media
forms have developed in certain ways through history and across nations. Students will
understand, analyze, and apply a working knowledge of terms and concepts underlying
contemporary media studies, the economic, social, and political impact of the media
industries, and the aesthetic and ethical implications of the media.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 245. DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY. This course will cover foundational
photography principles in the context of how the art and techniques of photography now
come together through the tools of the camera, the computer and industry-standard software.
Students will work and be guided through assigned projects with digital cameras and
systems to learn how to leverage emerging technologies of imagery.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 250. DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP. To be a digital citizen in today’s global village
one must know how to navigate the various online venues and be tuned into the ethical
behavior governing their use. This course will use hands-on learning, discussion and reading
to explore this digital world. Students will create blogs, wikis, avatars, podcasts, upload
photos to Flickr and learn about tagging in sites like De.li.cious. Students will ponder the
sociological impact of this Internet world and explore their own reactions to it by being
actively involved in it. Prerequisite: Communication Arts 110.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
communication studies. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
COMM 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in communication studies. Sophomore standing, permission of the department
chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
COMM 277. AUDIO PRODUCTION. Reviews the basics of audio production for
recording. A particular emphasis is placed on the medium of radio including web casting.
Consideration will be given to the history of radio broadcasting; properties of sound;
microphone types; recording and control room techniques; and computerized editing of
audio materials. Students will undertake a variety of practical projects in public affairs,
news, sports, remote, music, and drama programming with opportunity for airing quality
work on the College radio station.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 290. STUDIES IN COMMUNICATION. Intensive examination of an area of
communication not fully covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies
each semester.
Offered periodically, semester course, one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 131

COMM 300. PUBLIC RELATIONS. Focuses on public relations theory, strategy, and
techniques. The course emphasizes writing and developing public relations campaigns;
theories of public persuasion; legal and ethical considerations; and crisis management and
related issues. Students will develop a portfolio for a campus or community organization
which will include: an overall campaign plan, news releases, a brochure, a speech, a print
advertisement, a radio advertisement, and a final campaign presentation. Prerequisite:
Communication Arts 135 or 235 recommended.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 303. PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Focuses on speaking and writing
tools most often used by business professionals. Presentational speaking, personal
communicative development, professional communication, and interviewing will be
emphasized. Issues that relate to professional success will be explored. Must have junior or
senior standing.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 304. INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION. This course examines the
fundamental principles of effective interpersonal communication. Students are given the
opportunity to work in experiential learning groups and to reflect on effective and
ineffective interpersonal communication processes. Effective interpersonal communication
is a critical component of competent and ethical decision-making. Emphasizing a relational
view of communication – one that explores how relationships are created, negotiated,
maintained, and in some cases terminated – this course is designed with a dual approach
consisting of both theory and application that allows for the opportunity to critically analyze
and evaluate the intricacies of interpersonal relationships in various contexts.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 305. PERSUASION THEORY. Explores a variety of media to ascertain the
persuasive messages inherent in each genre. The course will familiarize the students with
the processes of persuasion, methods of studying persuasion, the theories of persuasion, and
ethical concerns about persuasion. The perspectives and tools developed should enable the
student to develop effective message strategies in both professional and personal life. An
excellent course for pre-professional majors and students involved in speech and debate.
This course, along with Communication 104, 212, and 427, fulfills the Information Literacy
(IL) requirement for Communication Arts majors. Prerequisite: Communication Arts 215.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 352. CHRISTIAN FAITH AND CINEMA. A survey of films, both the decidedly
Christian and decidedly secular. The student will consider the importance of a film’s theme
in deciding its worth, criteria by which they can choose valuable films to watch, and will
evaluate secular films through a Christian perspective. The student will also learn what it
means to possess a Biblical worldview and how “other” worldviews permeate popular
cinema.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 359. SCREENWRITING. This course is an introductory course for screenwriters.
Topics of study will include character development, plot structure, storytelling techniques
in film, as well as the narrative structure. Students will study films and screenplays as they
learn to recognize various elements mentioned previously in feature films. Additionally,
students will learn to craft their own stories for the screen. Semester course, three hours.
COMM 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Opportunities for students with extensive
background in communication studies to do intensive independent study or research on
specialized topics. Sophomore or higher standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

132 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

COMM 362. MEDIA LAW AND ETHICS. Reviews relevant communication and media
law and addresses a variety of communication-related ethical issues such as: libel, privacy,
copyright, newsgathering rights, etc.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in communication studies. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
COMM 378. VIDEO PRODUCTION. An introduction to broadcasting history, media
aesthetics, and the technology and practice of multimedia production. Lectures, tutorials,
and hands-on experience with cameras, microphones, lighting, and computer-based video
editing will provide the basis for further study and internships in this influential medium of
mass communication.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 388. ADVANCED VIDEO PRODUCTION. Advanced Video Production will
provide instruction in narrative media production, with an emphasis on studio level/team
projects. This may include documentary films, short films, news packages, special programs
and shows, etc. Preproduction, production, and post-production phases are carefully
developed and guided with faculty assistance and industry professionals. Each project will
build on key fundamentals to develop professional levels of production expertise and create
more portfolio-quality projects for students. With instructor permission, students may take
the course more than once, with a requirement that a completely new and more advanced
project will be undertaken each time. Prerequisite: Communication Arts 378.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 390. STUDIES IN COMMUNICATION. Intensive examination of areas of
communication not fully covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies
each semester.
Offered periodically, semester course, one, two, or three hours.
COMM 405. SPECIAL EVENTS AND PROMOTIONS. This course offers an
introduction to the principles and practices relevant to successful event planning. The course
content will explore a variety of topic areas such as social and cultural phenomenon of
special events, site selection, program planning, budgeting and sponsorships, vendor and
volunteer staff management, and publicity. Through the process of researching, planning,
coordinating, and evaluating events, students will learn how to design and execute events,
meetings, conferences, and conventions for a variety of organizations including trade and
professional associations, non-profit organizations, and corporations. Students may (under
the direction of the instructor) opt to take this course a second time ONLY IF they actively
participate as a leader in a new/ different role than in previous semester. Prerequisites: Junior
or senior standing, or permission of instructor.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 406. SOCIAL MEDIA WRITING. This course will explore a variety of social
media writing experiences. Solid writing practices will be defined (grammar, structure,
research), followed by practical experiential learning where students will write for a variety
of online platforms. Students will complete the course with a solid foundation on which to
build careers in numerous areas- marketing, writing, and production, among others. While
specific platforms will be explored, it is a distinct aim of the course to give students the
tools they need to write for existing social media as well as new and emerging media.
Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing, or permission of instructor.
Online only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 133

COMM 427. RHETORICAL CRITICISM. This course is required for Communication
Arts majors. Students study a variety of rhetorical-critical methodologies including
metaphoric, pentadic, cluster, narrative, fantasy theme, and ideological approaches.
Students engage in rhetorical criticism throughout the term. The final project is an original
rhetorical critique of a significant text for submission to a professional conference or
publication. This course, along with Communication 212, fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI)
requirement, for Communication Arts majors. Prerequisites: Communication Arts 212; and
senior status or permission of instructor.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 444. ADVANCED FILM THEORY. A deeper look at the medium of motion
pictures from the point of view of film theorists including semiotics; realism; expressionism;
auteur theory; cinema as art; montage; film as narrative; literature and adaptations to the
screen; documentary and propaganda approaches; genre conventions; psychology;
sociology; mythology; and ideology.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
COMM 459. ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION. Provides a critical
exploration of organizational communication theory, research, and application. This course
examines the factors involved in the functioning and analysis of complex organizations,
particularly the direct and indirect ways in which communication processes and social
dynamics affect organizations and employee interaction.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Opportunities for students with extensive
background in communication studies to do intensive independent study or research on
specialized topics. Sophomore or higher standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
COMM 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in communication studies. Senior standing, permission of the department chair,
and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
COMM 480. INTERNSHIP IN COMMUNICATION. Students may, with consent of the
department, earn academic credit for work done in a communication-related organization
(e.g., newspaper; radio or television station; public relations office; business; etc.). Students
must arrange for a faculty advisor, contact the organization where work will be done, keep
a daily log of activities, and write a final paper summarizing the internship. Students must
work 60 contact hours for each academic credit earned. Sophomore or higher standing and
permission of the department internship coordinator are required.
Semester course, one to six hours.
COMM 488. SEMINAR. An advanced course for junior and senior Communication Arts
majors to concentrate on specific subject matter to be determined by the instructor.
Individual research and extensive oral and written reports are required.
Semester course, three hours.
COMM 499. HONORS IN COMMUNICATION. The student who chooses to pursue
work beyond the basic requirements may do extensive reading in one of the following areas:
media studies; organizational communication; public relations; audio and video production;
filmmaking; oral interpretation; public address; group communication; and rhetorical or
communication theory. Extensive research paper and independent reading required.
Prerequisites: Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

134 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Design (DESI)
DESI 101. INTRO TO VISUAL COMMUNICATION DESIGN. This course is an indepth analysis of design principles and formal concepts that builds fundamental knowledge
of design as a visual language and communication tool. Students will learn through practical
application using industry-standard software.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 102. DESIGN THINKING. Students will investigate essential processes that form
the basis for all types of design disciplines including the ability to think divergently, problem
solve, and empathize.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 110. DESIGN SOFTWARE FOR BEGINNERS. Adobe Creative Suite is the
industry-standard tool set for virtually every design practitioner. In this class, students learn
about Adobe Creative Cloud and how to use Photoshop, Illustrator, and InDesign while
integrating them in a logical workflow.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 190. STUDIES IN DESIGN. Intensive examination of areas of design not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.
Offered periodically, semester course, one, two, or three hours.
DESI 201. VISUAL COMMUNICATION DESIGN I. In this course, students are
challenged with complex design problems for both print and digital environments with a
particular emphasis on typography and layout. Prerequisite: Design 101.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 202. VISUAL COMMUNICATION DESIGN II. This course continues to cultivate
skill in applying design principles and tools as students manipulate form and image to create
conceptually strong designs and visual systems. Prerequisite: Design 201.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 207. WEBSITE DEVELOPMENT FOR DESIGNERS. This is a foundational
course in the essential tools and technologies upon which websites are built. It is a course
designed for students approaching website development from a design and communication
perspective and assumes no prior experience with programming or web development
technologies. In this course, students will learn HTML and CSS, and will be able to
demonstrate how to structure, style, and publish websites. Prerequisite: Design 101.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 210. INTERACTIVE DESIGN. This course introduces students to strategy-based
process for planning and designing digital user experiences as well as the essentials of web
design using industry-standard software. Prerequisite: Design 101.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 220. DESIGN HISTORY. In this course, students will explore the origins of visual
communication and its evolution into the professional discipline commonly referred to as
“Design”. This is an introductory course that provides students with cultural and contextual
understanding of various professional design disciplines. Students will spend time studying
art and design movements, trends, and key individuals associated with each.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 301. VISUAL COMMUNICATION DESIGN III. In this course, students
investigate the design of logos, marks, and brands in a variety of scenarios. Students will
craft strategies, work with realistic constraints, and consider how a brand communicates
across a variety of channels as a system. Prerequisite: Design 201.
Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 135

DESI 390. STUDIES IN DESIGN. Intensive examination of areas of design not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.
Offered periodically, semester course, one, two, or three hours.
DESI 401. DESIGN IN PRACTICE. This course introduces students to professional
aspects of design such as portfolio preparation and presentation, formulating and pitching
design concepts, understanding client needs, and creating professional design documents
such as proposals, statements of work, and invoices. Students will also learn about pricing,
formatting for project delivery, and how to collaborate with clients. Prerequisite: Design
101 and junior or senior standing.
Semester course, three hours.
DESI 480. INTERNSHIP IN DESIGN. Students may, with consent of the department,
earn academic credit for work done in a design-related organization. Students must arrange
for a faculty advisor, contact the organization where work will be done, keep a daily log of
activities, and write a final paper summarizing the internship. Students must work 60 contact
hours for each academic credit earned. Sophomore or higher standing and permission of the
department internship coordinator are required.
Semester course, one to six hours.

Visual Arts (ART)
ART 101. ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF DRAWING. This course introduces
students to essential 2D art concepts and techniques using a variety of drawing tools to
produce black and white renderings on paper.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 103. CERAMICS I HANDBUILDING. This is an introductory studio class designed
to expose students to a variety of ceramic processes used to produce sculpture and vessel.
The goal is to broaden students’ understanding of clay as a viable medium for personal
visual expression. An additional fee is charged for this course.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 104. CERAMICS I WHEEL. This is an introductory studio class designed to expose
students to the potter’s wheel and throwing techniques used to produce hand-thrown vessels.
The goal is to broaden students’ understanding of clay as a viable medium for personal
visual expression as they create unique, finished clay. An additional fee is charged for this
course.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 105 INTRODUCTION TO COLOR THEORY IN PAINTING. This course is an
introduction to basic painting techniques and tools including acrylic, oil, and watercolor on
a variety of substrates.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 111. INTRODUCTION TO SCULPTURE. This is an introductory studio class
designed to expose students to a variety of sculptural processes and materials used to
produce 3D art.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 121. BEGINNING PRINTMAKING. This course is an introduction to printmaking
methods typically used by artists and designers. In addition to understanding techniques,
students will be challenged to think practically as they balance the affordances and
constraints of various printmaking processes. An additional fee is charged for this course.
Semester course, three hours.

136 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

ART 201. HISTORY AND APPRECIATION OF ART I. A survey of the visual arts
(including painting, architecture, and sculpture) from prehistory through the High
Renaissance, studied through illustrated lectures, readings, and class discussions. Students
may take either Art 201 or 202 or both classes, in any order. Prerequisite: Humanities 301.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 202. HISTORY AND APPRECIATION OF ART II. A survey of the visual arts
(including painting, architecture, and sculpture) from Mannerism through the Twentieth
Century, studied through illustrated lectures, readings, and class discussions. Students may
take either Art 201 or 202 or both classes, in any order. Prerequisite: Humanities 301.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 207. CERAMICS II. This course is a continuation of the beginning ceramics class
where students refine their understanding of the medium. Students are challenged to build
a body of work and develop a personal style. An additional fee is charged for this course.
Prerequisite: Art 103 or 104.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 208. PUEBLO POTTERY. The primary focus of this course is to increase
understanding and appreciation for the Pueblo Indians of the Southwest and their pottery.
Students use traditional Pueblo techniques to make tools, process clay, and produce artwork.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in art.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ART 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in art. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ART 290. STUDIES IN VISUAL ARTS. Typically offered during May Intersession, this
travel course features the culture, music, and art of selected areas of Western Europe and is
given as credit for those taking the travel interim who have already received credit for
Humanities 301: Civilization and the Arts. Course content includes viewing assigned pretrip documentaries, attending all trip lectures and visits, completing assigned readings, and
keeping a directed journal. Trip fees apply.
Intersession course, three hours.
ART 320. GALLERY STUDIES. This course provides an experience for students who are
interested in the arts in fields such as a gallery director, an event planner, as well as those
who are interested in pursuing a career as an artist. Students in the course will gain valuable
working experiences in planning and executing successful gallery-related events.
Semester course, three hours.
ART 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Advanced study in an area of art not available
through regular course offerings. An independent study form is required to register for this
class. Sophomore or higher standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ART 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in art. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ART 390. STUDIES IN VISUAL ARTS. A course that covers special topics in the field
of arts.
Offered periodically, semester course, one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 137

ART 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Advanced study in an area of art not available
through regular course offerings. An independent study form is required to register for this
class. Junior or higher standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ART 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in art. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ART 488. SEMINAR IN ART. Available only by pre-approved permission of the
department chair and the instructor involved. An additional fee is charged for this course.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Computer Science
Dr. Wolfe, Chair; Dr. Dr. Dellinger, Dr. Dickinson, Dr. Hutchins, Dr. H. Zhang. Additional
Instructional Faculty: Mr. Carlin.
The Computer Science Department seeks to provide its students with a solid foundation
in the field of computing in order to prepare them for employment in an exciting industry
or for advanced studies in top-ranked graduate schools. This foundation is built on
knowledge of mathematics, programming languages, algorithms and data structures, and
theory. In addition, students explore advanced topics, research projects, and technology
projects.
The Department believes that it must transmit more than technical expertise to its
students: whenever possible, the curriculum emphasizes the need for students to understand
their responsibilities to society and to behave ethically, as well as to strengthen and live their
Christian faith and witness to the professional community.
Students who complete a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science or a Bachelor of
Arts in Computer Science are prepared to use their computer science skills in a variety of
jobs or in their graduate education. Students who complete a Bachelor of Science in Data
Science are equipped with a combination of mathematics, statistics, computer science, and
data science knowledge, as well as knowledge of a particular domain where they can apply
data science techniques to solve practical problems. Broadly educated persons with
computing skills are in great demand.
No matter what career is pursued, computing professionals must possess the ability to
locate, evaluate, and use information. In addition, they must be able to communicate their
ideas and conclusions clearly and coherently through the written and spoken word.
Instruction in these core communication skills is provided in Computer Science 205, 350,
451, and 452, which cover the Writing Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI)
requirements and provide partial coverage of the Information Literacy requirement. As a
related concern, one of the significant problems in the computer field today is the proper
application of ethics. For this reason, all computer science majors are required to take
Computer Science 205 Ethics, Faith, and the Conscious Mind.
The Computer Science Department has formulated the following objectives and
specific outcomes to guide us in directing and evaluating our program.
Program Educational Objectives
1. Graduates active in the computer science profession will be successful because of
strong technical skills, including problem-solving and programming.
2. Graduates active professionally will be successful because of strong
communication and team skills.

138 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

3. Graduates’ behavior will be guided by professional and ethical principles based
on Biblical truths and a Christian worldview.
Student Outcomes
1. Analyze a complex computing problem and apply principles of computing and
other relevant disciplines to identify solutions
2. Design, implement, and evaluate a computing-based solution to meet a given set
of computing requirements in the context of the program’s discipline
3. Communicate effectively in a variety of professional contexts
4. Recognize professional responsibilities and make informed judgments in
computing practice based on legal and ethical principles
5. Function effectively as a member or leader of a team engaged in activities
appropriate to the program’s discipline
6. Apply computer science theory and software development fundamentals to
produce computing-based solutions (B.S. in Computer Science only)
Computing Facility
The Computer Science department is located in the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Math (STEM) building. Students have exclusive use of two labs designed specifically
to help students work collaboratively by utilizing horseshoe-shaped table and display
configurations called “pods.” Each of the eight pods in a room has a large monitor; students
can connect their school-issued laptops to the monitor in order to display to their table or,
with faculty permission, to show their work to the rest of class. Students also use the labs
outside of class to work on group projects.
In addition, the Department has console-game development stations (e.g. Sony PS4),
Apple MacBook computers, iPads, and Android tablets for mobile application development.
All of this equipment is available for both class and research use. Microsoft software is
available for all department majors, and includes many software products (e.g., professional
versions of Visual Studio and the Office Suite). The Department also has dedicated
equipment for work in computer security
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Computer Science—89-92
hours
Computer Science Core Requirements (27 hours):
Computer Science 141, 155, 220, 222, 233, 244, 314, 325, and 342.
Advanced Core Requirements (23 hours):
Computer Science 205, 340, 350, 422, 424, 448, 451, and 452.
Computer Science Electives (15 hours):
Choose fifteen hours from Computer Science 390, 401, 402, 435, 441, 442, 445, 446,
447, 475, Data Science 431, 450, or Robotics 302.
Math/Science Core Requirements: (24-27 hours):
Mathematics 161, 162, and 213.
Mathematics 214; or Mathematics 222and STAT 331.
Choose eight credits from Physics 101; PHYS 102; Chemistry 105 or both Chemistry
111 and 113; Chemistry 112 and 114; Biology 101; or Biology 102. Note:
Completing both Chemistry 105 and Chemistry 111/113 will not fulfill this this
requirement.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 139

Courses that count in the Bachelor of Science in Computer Science major quality point
average (MQPA): All courses with “COMP” prefix, “DSCI” prefix, and MATH 213. A
minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
B.S. in COMPUTER SCIENCE MAJOR FOUR-YEAR PLAN
FRESHMAN YEAR

SOPHOMORE YEAR

Fall Spring
Fall Spring
COMP 141 – COMP 220
3
3
COMP 222 – COMP 205
3
3
COMP 155 – MATH 162
3
4
COMP 244 – COMP 233
3
3
MATH 161 – Science Elective 4
4
MATH 213 – COMP 342
4
3
Science Elective – WRIT 101 4
3
HUMA 200 – MATH 214
3
4
HUMA 102 – PHYE 100
3
1
Found. Soc. Sci. – HUMA 202 3
3
17
15
General Electives
1
__
17
16
JUNIOR YEAR
SENIOR YEAR
COMP 325 – COMP 314
3
3
COMP 448 – COMP424
3
3
COMP 422 – COMP 340
3
3
COMP 451 – COMP 452
2
3
Comp. Sci. Elec. – COMP 350 3
3
Comp. Sci. Electives
3
3
Comp. Sci. Electives
3
3
HUMA 303 – General Elec.
3
3
HUMA 301 – General Elec.
3
3
General Electives
3
3
General Electives
2
1
General Elective
1
__
17
16
15
15
Note: Students must work with their advisor during their sophomore year to create a plan
for their computer science electives, since some electives are only offered in alternate years
and require certain prerequisites.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Computer Science—60-62 hours
Computer Science Core Requirements (35 hours):
Computer Science 141, 155, 205, 220, 222, 233, 244, 325, 340 or 342, 350, 451, and
452.
Computer Science Electives (15 hours):
Choose fifteen hours from any 300-400 level Computer Science, any 300-400 level
Data Science courses, and ROBO 302.
Math Requirements: (10-12 hours):
Mathematics 118 or 213.
One of Mathematics 201, 214, Statistics 331, Statistics 131, or Psychology 201.
Mathematics 141 or 161.
Courses that count in the Bachelor of Arts in Computer Science major quality point
average (MQPA):
All courses with “COMP” prefix, MATH 118, and MATH 213. A minimum MQPA
of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Data Science—67-71 hours
Math and Statistics Requirements (22 hours):
Mathematics 161, 162, 213, 214, Statistics 132, and one of Statistics 131, or
Psychology 201. Note: Students may substitute Mathematics 222 and Statistics 331
for Mathematics 214.

140 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Computer Science Requirements (118 hours):
Computer Science 141, 155, 220, 222, 244, and 435.
Data Science Requirements (9 hours):
Data Science201, 431, and 450.
Technical Elective (3 hours):
Choose one course (3 credits) from Computer 233, 445, 310, 314, or Statistics 412.
Domain Concentration (15-19 hours):
Complete one of the following concentrations:
Behavioral and Social Sciences (choose focus area from below):
• Economics: Economics 101, 102, 120, and six hours from any 300-400
level Economics courses.
• Exercise Science: Exercise Science 101, six hours from any 300-400
level Exercise Science courses (excluding EXER 305), and six hours
from any additional Exercise Science courses.
• Political Science: Political Science 104, 201, one of Political Science
204 or 205, and six hours from any 300-400 level Political Science
courses.
• Psychology: Psychology 101, six hours from any 300-400 level
Psychology courses and six hours from any additional Psychology
courses (excluding Psychology 201).
• Social Work: Social Work 101, 264, 342, 382, and three hours from any
300-400 level Social Work courses.
• Sociology: Sociology 101, 377, 473, and six hours from any 300-400
level Sociology courses.
Business (choose focus area from below):
• Accounting: Accounting 201, 202, 301, 321, and 405.
• Business: Accounting 201, 202, Finance 301, Management 103, and
Marketing 104.
• Entrepreneurship: Accounting 201, Entrepreneurship 101, 102, 201,
Finance 301, and two hours from any 300-400 level Entrepreneurship
courses.
• Finance: Accounting 201, 202, Finance 301, 332, 440, and three hours
from any 300-400 level Finance courses.
• Management: Management 103, 457, 475, and six hours from any 300400 level Management courses.
• Marketing: Statistics 131, Marketing 104, 315, 411, 415, and 419.
Natural Sciences (choose focus area from below):
• Biology: Biology 101, 102, 233, 234, and three hours from any 300-400
level Biology courses.
• Chemistry: Chemistry 111 and 113, or 105; 112 and 114, 227, 241, and
three hours from any 300-400 level Chemistry courses.
• Physics: Physics 101, 102, 135, 234, and three hours from any 300-400
level Physics courses.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 141

Courses that count in the Bachelor of Science Data Science major quality point average
(MQPA):
All courses with “DSCI” prefix; COMP 141, 155, 220, 222, 244, 435; MATH 161, 162,
213, 214, 222; PSYC 201; STAT 131, 132, and 331. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a minor in AI and Machine Learning (19 hours)
A minor in AI and Machine Learning will consist of one of Psychology 201, Statistics
131; Mathematics 214 or both Mathematics 222 and Statistics 331; and Computer Science
222, 422, 435, and 445.
Course Requirements for a minor in Computer Science (18 hours)
A minor in Computer Science will consist of Computer Science 141, 220, 222, and
nine additional hours of Computer Science courses 200-level and above.
Course Requirements for a minor in Computer Game Design and Development (18
hours)
A minor in Computer Game Design and Development will consist of Computer Science
441, 446, and 447; Writing 272; Communication Arts 135 or Design 110; and one of
Computer Science 401, 402, or 445.
Course Requirements for a minor in Cybersecurity (18 hours)
A minor in Cybersecurity will consist of Computer Science 205, 340, 342, 448, 475,
and Sociology 221.
Course Requirements for a minor in Data Science (24 hours)
A minor in Data Science will consist of Computer Science 141, 155, 220, 244; one of
Psychology 201, Statistics 131,132; Data Science 201 and 431.
Course Requirements for a minor in High-Tech Entrepreneurship (18 hours)
A minor in High-Tech Entrepreneurship will consist of Computer Science 401, 402, or
442; Computer Science 451 and 452; Entrepreneurship 101 and 201; Entrepreneurship 309,
317 or 409; and Entrepreneurship 480, 360 or 460 (minimum one hour).
Course Requirements for a minor in Mobile Development (18 hours)
A minor in Mobile Development will consist of Computer Science 244, 401, 402, 442;
Design 101 and 210.
Students who are enrolled in Computer Programming II (COMP 220) may choose to
change from COMP 220 to Computer Programming I (COMP 141) on or before the fifth
week of class provided the student did not earn a C or higher in the COMP 141 course. The
student must have the approval of the current COMP 220 instructor and the instructor of the
COMP 141 course to which the student intends to move. The student must complete and
return an Add/Drop Form to the Registrar’s Office.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Computer Science (COMP)
COMP 141. COMPUTER PROGRAMMING I. This course provides the student with an
understanding of hardware and software concepts, structured program design, and
programming using Java in an integrated development environment. Topics include
Boolean expressions, iteration, standard library classes and methods, arrays, searching and

142 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

sorting, multidimensional arrays, strings, dynamic memory allocation, programmer-defined
classes and methods, and deep copying. This course, along with Math 161 and 488, fulfills
the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the Mathematics major.
Semester course, three hours.
COMP 155. INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER SCIENCE. This course provides an
introduction to the field of Computer Science. Topics include creating precise specifications
and programming solutions for basic computing problems, data representation, and a
discussion of topics from the breadth of computing such as information systems, artificial
intelligence, networks, and the World Wide Web.
Fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 205. ETHICS, FAITH, AND THE CONSCIOUS MIND. This course focuses on
three components of ethics, faith, and philosophy from a computer science perspective.
First, it examines the Christian theological and philosophical foundations of science and the
ethical role of computer science in areas such as globalization, autonomous systems, and
intellectual property. Second, it considers perspectives on the origins, nature, and future of
human cognition and consciousness, including intersections of artificial intelligence and
consciousness. Third, it reviews ethical systems, cyberethical professional codes, ethical
problem-solving techniques, and specific ethical cases, again from a computer science
perspective and building on an informed Christian response to technology. This course,
along with Computer Science 350, fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for
Computer Science majors. Students may only receive credit for one of Computer Science
205 or Science, Faith, & Technology 205. Prerequisites: Humanities 102 (or Religion 211
and 212) and a lab science. The lab science may be taken concurrently with this course. This
course satisfies the SSFT General Education requirement.
Spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 211. PYTHON PROGRAMMING. A second programming course, introducing
the Python language to students already familiar with basic programming concepts. Topics
include Python syntax for control flow, I/O, and functions; built-in structures for lists,
tuples, and dictionaries; strings and string processing; classes and inheritance; and
exceptions. Students completing this course will be prepared to pass the PCEP certification
for Python programmers. Prerequisite: Computer Science 141.
Offered intermittently, semester course, three hours.
COMP 220. COMPUTER PROGRAMMING II. This is a second course in the Java
language: a review of essential language concepts, structured programming, and top-down
design. Object oriented program design principles including inheritance, abstract base
classes, interfaces, virtual methods, and polymorphism are covered. Other topics include
generics, linked data structures, and exception handling. Prerequisite: Computer Science
141.
Semester course, three hours.
COMP 222. INTRODUCTION TO DATA STRUCTURES AND ALGORITHMS. An
advanced course in programming using an object-oriented language, with an emphasis on
analyzing the run-time behavior of programs; the design and structure of programs; linear
data structures; recursion; binary search trees; sorting; and hash techniques for searching.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 220.
Fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 230. ADVANCED PROGRAMMING. Introduces students to several advanced
programming topics, including pointers, dynamic memory management, and principles of
dynamic languages. Additional topics may include introspection and asynchronous
computing. Prerequisite: Computer 220.
Spring semester only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 143

COMP 244. DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS. An introduction to database
management systems emphasizing the relational model. Topics include data manipulation
languages (SQL, QBE); database design (intuitive design, normalization, and E-R design
model); three-tier and multi-tier architecture; database security; and database integrity.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 220 or knowledge of its content.
Fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in computer
science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
COMP 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in computer science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
COMP 314. AUTOMATA THEORY. This course is an introduction to computation
theory including the topics: finite automata, regular languages, pushdown automata,
context-free languages, Turing machines, recursive languages and functions, and
computational complexity. Prerequisites: Computer Science 220 and Mathematics 213.
Spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 325. COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE AND ORGANIZATION. Organization,
elementary architectural design and computer instruction sets are examined and used via
programming in an assembly language. Students are given an introduction to the manner in
which digital computers actually work. Prerequisite: Computer Science 230.
Fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 340. OPERATING SYSTEMS. A study of the basic principles of operating system
design and implementation including types of computer systems, general architecture of
several representative computer systems, security, run-time systems, and performance
measurement and evaluation. Prerequisites: Computer Science 222 and one of Computer
Science 230, Engineering 130, or Electrical Engineering 310. Corequisite: Computer
Science 325 or Electrical Engineering 204.
Semester course, three hours.
COMP 342. DATA COMMUNICATION AND NETWORKING. This class introduces
the concepts of data communications used in information networks. Topics include
equipment utilization in information networks; techniques utilized to transmit signals (e.g.,
modulation, multiplexing, error detection, and correction); methods of message handling;
network configuration; and software utilized in implementing networks. Prerequisite:
Computer Science 220.
Spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 350. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING. This course introduces software-engineering
methodology, covering topics such as development cycles, testing, design, requirements
gathering and analysis, and project management. Students work in teams on a semester-long
project. Software Engineering is designed to fulfill the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking
Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for Computer Science majors.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 220 and junior standing.
Spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An advanced course for qualified students that
provides an opportunity for further computer programming and analysis experience on an
individual basis. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.

144 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

COMP 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in computer science. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.
COMP 390. SELECTED TOPICS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE. An examination of
areas of computer systems not fully covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject
matter varies each offering based on topic. Prerequisites: Computer Science 220 and
permission of the department.
Semester course, two or three hours.
COMP 401. PRINCIPLES OF iOS PROGRAMMING. The objective of this course is
to introduce mobile computing with an emphasis on projects and programming iOS devices
(e.g. iPad). Smartphones, and other Internet-based, highly mobile computing devices, are
an increasingly important computing platform and driver of software design. This course
covers Swift and the iOS SDK. Important software design issues, such as input modalities,
UI design, and location-aware web applications are covered. Students will be provided with
development systems. Prerequisite: Computer Science 222.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 402. PRINCIPLES OF ANDROID PROGRAMMING. The objective of this
course is to introduce Android with an emphasis on projects. Android mobile computing
devices are an increasingly important computing platform. This course covers the Android
SDK and teaches students how to develop basic Android applications. Students will be
provided with development systems. Prerequisite: Computer Science 222.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 422. THEORY OF ALGORITHMS. Topics include fundamental techniques for
designing efficient algorithms and basic mathematical methods for analyzing their
performance; paradigms for algorithm design; divide-and-conquer, greedy methods, graph
search techniques, dynamic programming; design of efficient data structures, and analysis
of the running time and space requirements of algorithms in the worst and average cases.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 222 and Mathematics 213. Fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 424. PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING. An overview of parallel
architectures. Shared memory and distributed memory parallelism. Functional
programming is emphasized, including its use in parallel computing. Prerequisite: Computer
222.
Spring semester only, three hours
COMP 435. INTRODUCTION TO MACHINE LEARNING. Machine learning is an
essential part of technologies such as image recognition, social network analysis, and
autonomous vehicles. This course introduces concepts and algorithms that enable computers
to learn from experience. Emphasis is on the practical application of the algorithms, with
some discussion of the underlying mathematics. Techniques covered include supervised
learning (linear and logistic regression, decision trees, support vector machines, and neural
networks), unsupervised learning (clustering and dimensionality reduction), and time-series
data (e.g., hidden Markov models or reinforcement learning). Prerequisites: Computer
Science 222; and either Mathematics 214 or both Mathematics 222 and one of Mathematics
331, Psychology 201 or Mathematics 201.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 441. 2D GAME DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT. This course covers concepts
and methods for the design and development of 2D computer games. Topics include sprites,

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 145

animation, game design, game implementation, and game development environments.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 222.
Fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 442. WEB PROGRAMMING TECHNOLOGIES. This course prepares students
with the fundamentals needed to program on the Internet. It offers a survey of programming
concepts that yield visible or audible results in Web pages and Web-based applications. The
course covers effective Web-page design, various markup languages, several scripting
languages, Web servers, and databases to provide all the skills and tools needed to create
dynamic Web-based applications. Prerequisite: Computer Science 220 and 244.
Fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 443. PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES. This course investigates basic concepts
of programming languages, including functions, types, and scoping. Functional
programming is an emphasis of the course, including first-order functions, lambda
expressions, and referential transparency. Prerequisite: Computer Science 222.
Spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 445. INTRODUCTION TO ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE. Artificial
intelligence topics included in this class are: predicate calculus, state space search,
knowledge representation, expert systems, reasoning in uncertain situations, and machine
learning. Prerequisites: Computer Science 222; and one of Mathematics 214, Statistics 331,
or Engineering 274.
Spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 446. 3D GAME DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT. This course is a continuation
of Computer Science 441 and is focused on the development of 3D games and other
advanced game programming techniques. Topics include graphics, lighting, textures,
performance, the 3D pipeline, and intentional design. Prerequisite: Computer Science 441.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 447. NETWORKED GAME DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT. This course is
a continuation of Computer Science 441 and is focused on the development of networked,
multiplayer console games. Topics include client/server models, synchronization, building
code for single and multiplayer use, and techniques for lag mitigation. Prerequisites:
Computer Science 441.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 448. COMPUTER SECURITY. An overview of software security flaws a
programmer should be careful to avoid. Students will learn how to avoid these flaws, as
well as practice finding them in existing code. Additionally, better alternatives will be
explored which will allow students to make better programs that are less vulnerable to
security exploits. Prerequisite: Computer Science 230; Corequisite: Computer Science 325.
Fall semester only, three hours.
COMP 451. SENIOR PROJECT I. This course is part of the capstone design experience
and is based on applying software engineering to a two-semester long project. This course
focuses on design. Students will write reports and make presentations. This course partially
fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirements for Computer Science majors.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 350.
Fall semester only, two hours.
COMP 452. SENIOR PROJECT II. This course is a continuation of Computer Science
451 and is focused on the development of a working, tested system delivered to a user
community. Students will write reports, make presentations, and deliver a working software
system. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and

146 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Information Literacy (IL) requirements for Computer Science majors. Prerequisite:
Computer Science 451.
Spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An advanced course for qualified students that
provides an opportunity for further computer programming and analysis experience on an
individual basis. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.
COMP 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in computer science. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.
COMP 475. ADVANCED SECURITY. A more comprehensive study of computer
security, including the goals of secure computing; elementary cryptography; and system and
network security. Practical applications of these ideas are provided by an investigation of
secure systems administration by means of team-based security projects. Various legal and
ethical issues in the field are also considered. Prerequisites: Computer Science 205, 342,
and 448.
Spring semester only, three hours.
COMP 480. INTERNSHIP IN COMPUTER SCIENCE. Students earn academic credit
for field experience that allows them to use their computer skills under the supervision of a
cooperating entity. A maximum of six credit hours may be applied toward the major. Junior
standing and permission of the department chair are required.
Semester course, one to six hours.
COMP 499. HONORS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE. A course for qualified junior or
senior students who are interested in an advanced computer-science experience. The course
has a significant research component, including system development, review of literature,
and writing. Topics change with each offering depending on the interests of the faculty
member teaching the course. Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor and department
chair.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.

Data Science (DSCI)
DSCI 201. INTRODUCTION TO DATA SCIENCE. An introduction to methods and
tools used to analyze and understand data. Topics include common toolkits for data analysis
and visualization. Students engage in hands-on analysis of real-world data sets and discuss
social issues related to data analysis. Prerequisites: Computer Science 141 and 155.
Corequisite: Statistics 131 or Psychology 201.
Fall semester only, three hours
DSCI 431. INTRODUCTION TO BIG DATA. The objective of this course is to introduce
key concepts and technologies of big data management. This course covers big data
characteristics, storage, and processing. Students learn how to use multiple big data
technologies, such as stream processing, in-memory databases, Hadoop MapReduce,
NoSQL, and NewSQL systems. Prerequisites: Computer Science 220 and 244.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
DSCI 450. APPLIED MODELING AND VISUALIZATION. The capstone course in
data science. Students apply modeling and visualization techniques to a large project, giving
presentations about their results and writing a report. Legal and ethical issues in data science
are examined. Prerequisites: Mathematics 213 or Statistics 331; Mathematics 214 or 222;
Data Science 201,215; Computer Science 222, 244; Data Science 431 or Computer Science
435.
Spring semester only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 147

Economics
Dr. Herbener, Chair; Dr. Frank, Dr. Fuller, Dr. Ritenour.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Economics—58 hours
Core Requirements (27 hours):
Economics 101, 102, 120, 301, 302, 342, 407, 408, and 420.
Economics Electives (15 hours):
Fifteen hours from the following:
Economics 202, 204, 206, 207, 213, 214, 215, 216, 260, 270, 290, 303, 306, 309,
310, 360, 370, 390, 401, 402, 404, 456, 460, 470, 480 (3 credit max), and 499.
Major-Related Requirement (16 hours):
Philosophy 161, 211; Statistics 131; Mathematics 141 or 161*; and Sociology 101.
Courses that count in the Economics major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ECON” prefix. A minimum of 2.00 MQPA is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Economics—70
hours
Business Core Requirements (36 hours)
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103,
110 or 111, 214, 303, 304, 486; Marketing 104; and Statistics 131.
Economics Core (30 hours):
Economics 101, 102, 120, 216, 301, 302, 310, 401, 402, and 456.
Major-Related Course (4 hours):
Mathematics 141 or 161*.
*Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261.
Courses that count in the Business Economics major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “ECON”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE 105), “INBS”,
“MARK”, “MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106) prefix, and STAT 131. A minimum MQPA of
2.00 is required to graduate.
Students who have completed a major in Economics or Business Economics should be
able to perform and present economic analysis and understand and critique the economic
analysis of others. To attain these ends, they need to develop skills in locating, evaluating,
and using information and proficiency in writing and speaking. To give students a forum to
demonstrate their mastery of these skills, the Department of Economics requires Economics
420 as a Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI) and Information Literacy (IL)
course for Economics majors, and Management 214 as WI and IL and Management 486 as
SI for Business Economics majors.
Course requirements for a minor in Criminal Justice Studies (19 hours)
A minor in Criminal Justice Studies will consist of Sociology 101, 377, and four
courses from Sociology 203, 221, 233, 314, 315, 331, or Economics 402.

148 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Course Requirements for a minor in Economics (21 hours)
A minor in Economics will consist of Economics 101, 102, 120, and twelve additional
hours in economics.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Economics (ECON)
ECON 101. PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS (MICRO) I. An examination of the
fundamental principles of human action and the laws of the market economy. Focus will be
on exchange, prices, production, costs, entrepreneurship, and government intervention.
Three hours.
ECON 102. PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS (MACRO) II. An examination of the
fundamental principles of human action and the laws of the market economy. Focus will be
on money, inflation, credit, interest, capital, economic progress, and business cycles.
Three hours.
ECON 120. FOUNDATIONS OF ECONOMICS. An investigation of the theological,
philosophical and epistemological foundations of economics. The nature of man and the
created world, laws of action and interaction, and the good society will be explored.
Three hours.
ECON 202. ECONOMIC EXPANSION AND DEVELOPMENT. A study of economic
progress with emphasis on the developing world. Topics include wealth, poverty, capital
accumulation, and foreign aid.
Three hours.
ECON 204. ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS. An investigation of environmental,
conservation, and population issues. Pollution, natural resource use, demographic changes,
and technology will be studied.
Three hours.
ECON 206. COMPARATIVE ECONOMIC SYSTEMS. An analysis of different
economic systems. The command economy, various forms of the mixed economy, different
types of interventionism, and the market economy will be compared and contrasted.
Three hours.
ECON 207. LABOR ECONOMICS. An analysis of the working of labor markets. Labor
unions and labor legislation and regulation will be examined.
Three hours.
ECON 213. AMERICAN ECONOMIC HISTORY TO 1860. A survey of the American
economy from colonial days to the Civil War. Economic progress and business cycles will
be examined with emphasis on how the market economy was developed by entrepreneurs
and hampered by politicians.
Three hours.
ECON 214. AMERICAN ECONOMIC HISTORY SINCE 1860. A survey of the
American economy from the Civil War to the present. Economic growth and business cycles
will be examined with emphasis on how the market economy was developed by
entrepreneurs and hampered by politicians.
Three hours.
ECON 215. URBAN AND RURAL ECONOMICS. An examination of the spatial aspects
of economic activity. Location decisions of production facilities by entrepreneurs and
households by families will be examined with an emphasis on the changes in cities and rural
areas as an aspect of economic development.
Three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 149

ECON 216. ECONOMICS OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP. An examination of
entrepreneurship both theoretically and in applied issues including innovation, growth,
financing, strategy, institutional environment, and policy.
Three hours.
ECON 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
economics. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Three hours.
ECON 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in economics. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Three hours.
ECON 290. STUDIES IN ECONOMICS. Studies in areas of economics not covered by
regular departmental offerings.
Three hours.
ECON 301. INTERMEDIATE MICROECONOMICS. A study of prices and
production. Utility, costs, competition, and equilibrium will be examined. Prerequisites:
Economics 101 and 102.
Three hours.
ECON 302. INTERMEDIATE MACROECONOMICS. A study of economic progress
and business cycles. Keynesian, Monetarist, Austrian, and other views will be examined.
Prerequisites: Economics 101 and 102.
Three hours.
ECON 303. INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS. An examination of the worldwide
market economy. The movement of goods, people, capital, and money across political
borders and political interference with the market will be investigated. Prerequisites:
Economics 101 and 102.
Three hours.
ECON 306. AUSTRIAN ECONOMICS. An examination of the lives and thoughts of
Austrian school economists. Contributions in monetary, capital, and business cycle theory,
methodology, economic calculation, entrepreneurship, and other areas will be highlighted.
Three hours.
ECON 309. PUBLIC POLICY. An analysis of current public policy. Topics include labor
and anti-trust regulations, education and energy policies, welfare programs, and price and
wage controls.
Three hours.
ECON 310. INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION. A study of how producers seek to satisfy
demand in different market environments they face. The structure and activities of industries
and the effects of these on competition, prices, and resource allocation in the economy will
be examined. Prerequisite: Economics 101.
Three hours.
ECON 342. INTRODUCTION TO ECONOMETRICS. This course explores probability
theory, hypothesis testing, simple and multiple regression analysis, specification of
econometric models, and introduces quasi-experimental techniques. Emphasis is placed on
application of econometric techniques in estimating economic relationships. Prerequisites:
Statistics 131 and Mathematics 141.
Three hours.
ECON 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of special topics in economics.
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Three hours.

150 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

ECON 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in economics. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Three hours.
ECON 390. STUDIES IN ECONOMICS. Studies in areas of economics not covered by
regular departmental offerings.
Three hours.
ECON 401. MONEY AND BANKING. A study of money and credit. Inflation, interest
rates, and various monetary and banking regimes will be investigated. Prerequisites:
Economics 101 and 102.
Three hours.
ECON 402. LAW AND ECONOMICS. An economic analysis of law’s traditional
categories: property, tort, contract, and criminal. This course will follow the outline of
traditional courses in law and economics but will also devote time to the critiques that have
been leveled against law and economics. Prerequisite: Economics 101 or 120.
Three hours.
ECON 404. PUBLIC FINANCE. An examination of the types of and justifications for
government activity. Taxation, expenditures, debt, and monetary inflation will be explored.
Prerequisites: Economics 101 and 102.
Three hours.
ECON 407. HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT TO 1870. A study of the
prominent figures in the development of economic thought and the major schools of
economic thought from the ancient Greeks through the British classical school. Insights into
current debates about economic theory will be highlighted.
Three hours.
ECON 408. HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT SINCE 1870. A study of the
prominent figures in the development of economic thought and the major schools of
economic thought from the beginning of the marginalist revolution to the present. Insights
into current debates about economic theory will be highlighted.
Three hours.
ECON 420. ECONOMICS COLLOQUIUM. An immersion into the activities of
scholars: writing, presenting, critiquing, and debating. Students will lead and participate in
discussions of articles and books, write and present their own research, and critique the
research of other students. This course satisfies the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking
Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the Economics major.
Prerequisites: Senior standing or permission of the department chair.
Three hours.
ECON 456. FINANCIAL MARKETS AND INSTITUTIONS. A study of the nature,
origin, working and development of financial markets and institutions. Topics include the
markets for and institutions offering credit, equities, and derivatives. Prerequisite:
Economics 101 and 102.
Three hours.
ECON 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of special topics in economics.
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Three hours.
ECON 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in economics. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Three hours.
ECON 480. INTERNSHIP IN ECONOMICS. Practical experience in applied economics.
Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair.
Three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 151

ECON 488. SEMINAR IN ECONOMICS. An advanced course for juniors and seniors
who desire in-depth exploration of a specific topic in economics using research, discussion,
oral reports and written essays. Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair.
Three hours.
ECON 499. HONORS IN ECONOMICS. Advanced research in economics by seniors
who have shown unusual aptitude in economics. Prerequisite: Permission of the department
chair.
Three hours.

Education
Dr. Nichols, Chair; Dr. Chapman, Associate Chair; Dr. Blackburn, Dr. Culbertson, Dr.
Dreves, Dr. Fecich, Dr. Heisey, Mrs. Munson, Dr. Sabousky. Adjunct: Mrs. Martin.
Additional Instructional Faculty:, Mrs. Bodamer, Mrs. Frederick, Mrs. Martin, Mr.
Nemeth, Mr. Omasits, Mrs. Potter, Mrs. Rupnik, Ms. Senita, Mr. Snyder, Mrs. Davis.
The Education Department of Grove City College embraces the mission, goals, and
objectives of the College while implementing standards established for teacher education
by the state of Pennsylvania and as recommended by research in the field of education. The
faculty of the Education Department supports these objectives and standards and seeks to
provide the specialized knowledge required by the education profession. Department faculty
and staff members dedicate themselves to assist Grove City College pre-service teachers
gain an understanding of the craft while supplying them with ample field experiences to
practice the art of teaching.
Pedagogical, intellectual, and professional knowledge represent the tools of the
teaching craft. These tools are selected so that our pre-service teachers possess the skills
they need to plan, assess, and adapt instruction to various ethnicities, socio-economic
groups, learning styles, and learning capabilities. We are united in our commitment to
supply our pre-service teachers with the necessary capabilities to be successful in teaching
to the whole person when they leave our mentoring and enter their own classrooms.
Education majors who are planning to become teachers or to pursue graduate studies
following graduation should strive to be good writers and speakers and to know how to find,
analyze, and use information. To that end, Education 488 is a Writing Intensive (WI) and
Speaking Intensive (SI) course. Education 203 and 488 are Information Literacy (IL)
courses designed to provide the necessary skills for Education majors to use electronic
information technology and resources and explore scholarly research within the field of
education.
CERTIFICATION OF TEACHERS
Grove City College is approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Education to offer
certification programs in the areas of Elementary, Elementary with Middle Level, Middle
Level, Elementary with Special Education, Special Education, Foreign Language K-12, and
Secondary School Education in any of the following subject areas: Biology, Chemistry,
English (also with communications), Foreign Language (French and Spanish),
Mathematics, Music, Physics, Social Sciences, and interdisciplinary fields of General
Science - Biology, Chemistry, and Physics. Middle-level certification includes a broad
range of teaching preparation along with two content area studies: Science and Math,
Science and English, Science and History, Math and English, Math and History. Secondary
certification students work closely between the Education Department and their content
areas to complete courses recommended to meet requirements for the subject area education
major and also the professional education course requirements.

152 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Teachers are prepared for careers in public and private education across a wide variety
of roles in public, private, international, and additional fields within education. The
Department of Education offers in-depth career counseling throughout the education
development of students, and after graduation. Additionally, the Department offers the
services of a Certification Officer to assist students in meeting requirements for teacher
licensure. Pennsylvania Teacher licensure includes the Instructional I Certificate issued by
the Pennsylvania Department of Education to those Grove City College graduates who have
completed an approved college program, successfully fulfilled Pennsylvania Teacher
Certification requirements (including required testing, Act 33, Act 34, Act 114 clearances
and other state requirements), and have been recommended by the College for certification.
Additional areas of study (as approved by the PA Department of Education), such as the
Integrative Science Technology Engineering Mathematics Endorsement may also be
completed upon fulfillment of approved program and fulfillment of state requirements.
It should be noted that graduation and certification are not synonymous terms. All
students seeking certification must apply to the Department of Education for admission to
the certification program. Admission, retention, and recommendation for certification are
contingent upon the approval of the Department of Education and the faculty of the student's
area of certification. Education Majors must meet the entry testing requirements articulated
by the Pennsylvania Department of Education prior to formal admission into the
certification program.
Changes in state licensure requirements may necessitate changes in course
requirements for students, particularly for those students who extend their studies beyond
the typical four-year sequence. Careful attention to Education Department
recommendations for course scheduling is important for staying current with certification
requirements.
SCHOLASTIC REQUIREMENTS, ADMISSION AND RETENTION
All students wishing to enter the teacher education program must make formal
application for admittance and receive acceptance in accordance with admission
requirements. Students seeking admission as credential candidates should make formal
application by November 1 of the sophomore year. Non-traditional (returning) students
are advised on an individual basis (see Student Life section).
All students will be required to have a 3.00 Career Quality Point Average (CQPA) to
be certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This requirement reflects provisions as
stated by Chapter 354, passed by the Pennsylvania State Board of Education in May 2000.
In order that students may meet the above standard, the Education Department monitors
progress. Students must maintain a minimal CQPA and MQPA as they advance through
each academic year. These QPA requirements are detailed in the Education Department
Handbook. Students are, therefore, advised to reference this source for further information.
Students seeking Endorsement programs may have additional requirements to meet,
including making progress on initial certification requirements and admittance to the
endorsement program.
POLICY GOVERNING COURSE REQUIREMENTS FOR TEACHER
CANDIDATES ONLY SEEKING CERTIFICATION
For those teacher candidates who are already certified in some area and only seek
certification at Grove City College in an additional area, the following guidelines are to be
followed contingent upon Grove City College and Pennsylvania Department of Education
guidelines:

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 153

• Candidates who have already taken courses in the area in which they seek
certification must take at least 50% of the courses required for this certification at
Grove City College.
• Candidates who start with no hours in the additional area of certification may only
transfer six hours to Grove City College without special advance permission from
the department head in their new area of certification.
• Candidates seeking certification must have a minimum career QPA of 3.00 and a
minimum major QPA of 2.75 to enter the Grove City College program.
For candidates who have no certification but have a bachelor’s degree from a regionally
accredited college or university, the following guidelines are to be followed, contingent
upon Grove City College and Pennsylvania Department of Education guidelines:
• Candidates who have completed the required hours in their major (as shown on
their status sheet) but require education courses for certification must take all of
their education courses at Grove City College. (Under certain conditions up to six
hours may be taken elsewhere with prior approval.) Candidates who have the
required hours in their major may, however, be required to take up to fifteen
additional hours in their subject area at the discretion of their subject area advisor.
• Candidates who have completed their hours in education (as shown on their status
sheet) but have not had the required subject area courses must take all of their
subject area courses at Grove City College. (Under certain conditions up to six
hours may be taken elsewhere with prior approval.)
• Candidates who have not completed the required education and subject area courses
will follow both of the above guidelines.
• Candidates must have completed the teacher education core curriculum courses.
• Candidates who have already earned an undergraduate degree must have a
minimum career QPA of 3.00 and a minimum major QPA of 2.75 to enter the Grove
City College program.
• Additional requirements for certification may include passing scores on the Praxis
exam.
REQUIREMENTS FOR TEACHING IN OTHER STATES
Students seeking certification in states other than Pennsylvania should consult the
Certification Officer in the Department of Education and research licensure requirements
through specific state departments, offices, and/or bureaus of education.
INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS
International students, who are not US citizens and who are interested in a teaching,
are advised to consult with the Certification Officer in the Department of Education for
further information. The Pennsylvania Department of Education currently requires that
candidates for certification be US Citizens or those who have signed a “declaration of
intent” to become a US Citizen.
TEACHER'S EXAMINATIONS
Credential candidates must successfully complete the appropriate sections of the
National Teachers Examination for certification in Pennsylvania or other states. Test
information is available via the Department of Education Career Services website.
ELEMENTARY, SPECIAL EDUCATION, and MIDDLE LEVEL PROGRAMS
Students completing programs of study that lead to certification for teaching may be
required to complete more than the standard 128 hours required to graduate from Grove

154 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

City College and may also incur additional tuition charges. Program requirements and other
specific details are available in the Education Department Office.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Elementary Education—73
hours
Liberal Arts Core (15 hours):
Education 318, 319;Mathematics 151, 152; Music Education 315; Psychology 102
and 209.
Education Core Requirements (58 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 342, 343, 381, 382,
383, 450, 488; and Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed
Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the
Education 202 requirement.
Courses that count in the Elementary Education major quality point average
(MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix, PSYC 102, 209, and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA
of 2.00 is required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required
for certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Special Education with
Elementary Education—92 hours
Liberal Arts Core (15 hours):
Education 318, 319; Mathematics 151, 152; Music Education 315; Psychology 102
and 209.
Education Core Requirements (53 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 342, 343, 450, 488;
Special Education 412. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while dual
enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Dual Certification in Special Education Requirements (24 hours):
Special Education 101, 103, 202, 203, 204, 205, 306, 307, 308, and 309.
Courses that count in the Special Education with Elementary Education major quality
point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” and “SEDU” prefixes; PSYC 102 and 209. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the
cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Special Education with a
concentration in Elementary Education—90 hours
Liberal Arts Core (12 hours):
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102, and 209.
Special Education Core Requirements (69 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 325, 326, 327, 342, 343, 450, 488; Special
Education 103, 202, 203, 204, 205, 306, 307, 308, 309, and 412. *Note: Students
who completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to
complete the Education 202 requirement.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 155

Concentration in Elementary Education (9 hours):
Special Education 101; Education 324, 328, and one of Education 318, 319 or Music
Education 315.
Courses that count in the Special Education with a concentration in Elementary
Education major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” and “SEDU” prefixes; PSYC 102 and 209. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the
cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Special Education with a
concentration in Middle Level Education—91 hours
Liberal Arts Core (12 hours):
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102, and 209.
Special Education Core Requirements (69 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 325, 326, 327, 342, 343, 450 488; Special
Education 103, 202, 203, 204, 205, 306, 307, 308, 309, 412. *Note: Students who
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete
the Education 202 requirement.
Concentration in Middle Level Education (10 hours):
Special Education 101; Education 324, 329, and 381.
Courses that count in the Special Education with a concentration in Middle Level
Education major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” and “SEDU” prefixes; PSYC 102 and 209. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the
cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Special Education with a
concentration in Secondary Education—85 - 87 hours
Liberal Arts Core (6 hours):
Psychology 102, and 209.
Special Education Core Requirements (69 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 281, 323, 325, 326, 327, 342, 343, 450 488; Special
Education 103, 202, 203, 204, 205, 306, 307, 308, 309, and 412. *Note: Students
who completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to
complete the Education 202 requirement.
Concentration in Secondary Education (12 hours):
Special Education 101; Education 215, 371, and two secondary content courses
(minimum six hours) from the same department choosing from Biology, Chemistry,
English, History/Social Studies, Mathematics, and Physics. Note: any MATH
courses taken for the Quantitative/Logical Reasoning requirement may not be used
for this requirement.

156 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Courses that count in the Special Education with a concentration in Secondary
Education major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” and “SEDU” prefixes; PSYC 102 and 209. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the
cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Math/English
Education—99 hours
Liberal Arts Core (27 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357;
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102; Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science
202 or Biology lab course; and Science 203 or Chemistry lab course.
Math/English Content (18 hours):
Three MATH prefix courses (9 hours); and three COMM/ENGL prefix courses (9
hours) choosing from the following: English 203, 204, 222, 261, 302, 351, 352, 402,
Communication Arts 104, 225, 235, or 378.
Education Core Requirements (54 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 450,
488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while
dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Math/English Education major quality point
average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required
to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Math/History
Education—90 hours
Liberal Arts Core (27 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357;
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102; Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science
202 or Biology lab course; and Science 203 or Chemistry lab course.
Math Content (9 hours):
Three MATH prefix courses.
Education Core Requirements (54 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 450,
488; and Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Math/History Education major quality point
average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 157

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/English
Education—94 hours
Liberal Arts Core (15 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357;
Mathematics 151, 152; and Psychology 102.
Science/English Content (25 hours):
Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 202 or Biology lab course; Science 203
or Chemistry lab course; one additional four-credit science course; and three
COMM/ENGL prefix courses (9 hours) choosing from the following: English 203,
204, 222, 261, 302, 351, 352, 402, Communication Arts 104, 225, 235, or 378.
Education Core Requirements (54 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 450,
488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while
dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/English Education major quality point
average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/History
Education—85 hours
Liberal Arts Core (9 hours):
Math 151, 152; and Psychology 102.
Science/History Content (22 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; Science
201 or Physics lab course; Science 202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 or
Chemistry lab course; one additional four-credit science course.
Education Core Requirements (54 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 450,488;
Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while dual
enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/History Education major quality point
average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/Math
Education—94 hours
Liberal Arts Core (15 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357;
Mathematics 151, 152; and Psychology 102.

158 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Science/Math Content (25 hours):
Three MATH prefix courses (9 hours); Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science
202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 or Chemistry lab course; and one additional
four-credit science course.
Education Core Requirements (54 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 383, 450,
488; Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while
dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/Math Education major quality point
average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Math/English
and Elementary Education—113 hours
Liberal Arts Core (27 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357;
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102; Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science
202 or Biology lab course; and Science 203 or Chemistry lab course.
Math/English Content (18 hours):
Three MATH prefix courses (9 hours); and three COMM/ENGL prefix courses (9
hours) choosing from the following: English 203, 204, 222, 261, 302, 351, 352, 402,
Communication Arts 104, 225, 235, or 378.
Education Core Requirements (53 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 450, 488;
Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while dual
enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours):
Education 281, 318, 319, 328, 342, 343.
Music Education 315; Psychology 209.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Math/English and Elementary Education
major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required
to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Math/History
and Elementary Education—114 hours
Liberal Arts Core (27 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357;
Mathematics 151, 152; Psychology 102; Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science
202 or Biology lab course; and Science 203 or Chemistry lab course.
Math Content (9 hours):
Three MATH prefix courses.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 159

Education Core Requirements (53 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 450, 488;
and Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while
dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours):
Education 281, 318, 319 328, 342, 343.
Music Education 315; Psychology 209.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Math/History and Elementary Education
major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/English
and Elementary Education—108 hours
Liberal Arts Core (15 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357;
Mathematics 151, 152; and Psychology 102.
Science/English Content (25 hours):
Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science 202 or Biology lab course; Science 203
or Chemistry lab course; one additional four-credit science course; and three
COMM/ENGL prefix courses (9 hours) choosing from the following: English 203,
204, 222, 261, 302, 351, 352, 402, Communication Arts 104, 225, 235, or 378.
Education Core Requirements (53 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 450, 488;
Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while dual
enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours):
Education 281, 318, 319, 328, 342, 343.
Music Education 315; Psychology 209.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/English and Elementary Education
major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/History
and Elementary Education—99 hours
Liberal Arts Core (9 hours):
Math 151, 152; and Psychology 102.
Science/History Content (22 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357; Science
201 or Physics lab course; Science 202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 or
Chemistry lab course; and one additional four-credit science course.

160 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Education Core Requirements (53 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 4450, 488;
Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while dual
enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours):
Education 281, 318, 319, 328, 342, 343.
Music Education 315; Psychology 209.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/History and Elementary Education
major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Middle Level Science/Math
and Elementary Education—108 hours
Liberal Arts Core (15 hours):
History 253; one of History 204, 283, 285, 317, 318, 334, 336, 349 or 357;
Mathematics 151, 152; and Psychology 102.
Science/Math Content (25 hours):
Three MATH prefix courses (9 hours); Science 201 or Physics lab course; Science
202 or Biology lab course; Science 203 or Chemistry lab course; and one additional
four-credit science course.
Education Core Requirements (53 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 228, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329, 381, 382, 450, 488;
Special Education 101. *Note: Students who completed Education 205 while dual
enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202 requirement.
Dual Certification in Elementary Education Requirements (15 hours):
Education 281, 318, 319, 328, 342, 343.
Music Education 315; Psychology 209.
Courses that count in the Middle Level Science/Math and Elementary Education
major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EDUC” prefix and SEDU 101. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is
required to graduate. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.
Course Requirements for a minor in Special Education (18 hours)
A minor in Special Education will consist of 18 required hours, including Psychology
102, 209, Special Education 101 and 202; and six additional hours from Special Education
204, 205, 308 or 309.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 161

INTEGRATIVE SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY ENGINEERING AND
MATHEMATICS K-12 ENDORSEMENT PROGRAM
(INTEGRATIVE STEM ENDORSEMENT)
The Integrative Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics K-12
Endorsement Program is intended to improve a teacher’s skills in dealing with complex
classroom settings in the emerging area of STEM Education. This endorsement may be
added to existing Level I or Level II Certificates.
To be admitted into a STEM Endorsement Program, candidates must be enrolled in an
approved Level I program or hold a Level I or II certificate. Completion of the STEM
Endorsement Program may include completing courses outside of the regular fall and spring
semester offerings (such as summer and January terms).
Course requirements for an Integrative STEM Education Endorsement (12 hours)
An endorsement in Integrative STEM Education will consist of Education 510, 511,
512, and 513.

Education (EDUC)
EDUC 202. INTRODUCTION TO THE TEACHING PROFESSION. A study of the
pedagogical framework of education with emphasis on the legal and organizational issues
related to American institutions of education. This includes an analysis of the current reform
movements and in impact upon the role of the professional educator. Education majors
must complete and may only receive credit for one of Education 202 or the combination of
Education 205 and 206.
Semester course, three hours.
EDUC 203. CULTURALLY RELEVANT PEDAGOGY. A study of the characteristics
and educational needs of learners from diverse cultural backgrounds. The course is designed
to equip educators with methods to address the educational needs of culturally diverse
groups and students from limited English backgrounds. This course satisfies the Information
Literacy (IL) requirement for PreK-4 Elementary and Middle Level Education majors.
Prerequisites: Education 202 and Psychology 102. For education majors only.
Semester course, three hours.
EDUC 204. TECHNOLOGIES OF INSTRUCTION. An introduction to educational
media with an emphasis on applications of computer technology in education; general
models for computer usage in education and educational institutions; and case studies of
specific projects in terms of approach, effectiveness, and implications for the future.
Emphasis will be on the application of educational media and technology within the K-12
school curriculum. For education majors only.
Semester course, three hours.
EDUC 205. OVERVIEW OF THE TEACHING PROFESSION. A study of the
pedagogical framework of education with emphasis on the legal and organizational issues
related to American institutions of education. This includes an analysis of the current reform
movements and impact upon the role of the professional educator. Education majors must
complete and may only receive credit for one of Education 202 or the combination of
Education 205 and 206. Prerequisite: Dual Enrollment Program students only.
Spring semester course, two hours.
EDUC 206. CLINICAL INTRODUCTION TO THE TEACHING PROFESSION. A
classroom extension of Education 205 with a focus on face to face teaching and the required
in-school field experience. Education majors must complete and may only receive credit for
one of Education 202 or the combination of Education 205 and 206. Prerequisite: Education
205.
Fall semester course, one hour.

162 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

EDUC 215. SECONDARY CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION I. This course
provides an overview of all curriculum components essential for operating a secondary
education classroom. Major curriculum approaches are explored, and students are expected
to complete unit planning skills implementing these approaches. Additional focus will be
on classroom management strategies, school setting and culture, selecting course materials,
and introduction to professionalism/ethics. Prerequisites: Education 202 and Psychology
102. Corequisite: Education 371.
Semester course, two hours.
EDUC 228. SURVEY OF ADOLESCENT LITERATURE. A survey of young adult
literature for educators teaching in upper elementary, middle grades (4-8) with an extensive
representation of books from classic and contemporary authors. Major literary genres are
studied, trends in adolescent literature are discussed, and issues in selecting and using
literature in the 4-8 classrooms are explored. Priority given to Middle Level and English
Secondary Education Certification majors.
Spring semester only, two hours.
EDUC 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in education.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EDUC 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in education. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EDUC 281. EARLY CHILDHOOD FIELD EXPERIENCE (FIRST LEVEL). This
one-credit field experience is an internship course designed to permit beginning level early
education students to engage in a semester-long field experience in the Early Education
Center. This course is required for Early Childhood certification. Freshman or sophomore
level course.
Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 307. METHODS OF TEACHING MODERN LANGUAGES. A course designed
to familiarize students with both theoretical and practical aspects of teaching foreign
languages: listening, speaking, reading, writing, and culture. Designed to complement and
expand upon skills developed in curriculum and instruction. Prerequisite: Spanish 362 or
French 362.
Fall semester only, three hours.
EDUC 316. Secondary English/History/Foreign Language Curriculum and
Instruction II. This course provides English, History and Foreign Language secondary
education majors with an advanced implementation of planning and instruction in secondary
classrooms. Topics will include literacy in the content area, motivation, management
techniques and English/history/foreign language-specific teaching strategies. Topics
discussed will be implemented through an imbedded field that will require English, History
and Foreign Language preservice teachers to demonstrate the implementation of topics.
Students will also complete an advanced examination of Educational professionalism and
ethics. Prerequisite: Education 375.
Semester course, two hours.
EDUC 317. SECONDARY MATH/SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION
II. This course provides Math and Science secondary education majors with an advanced
implementation of planning and instruction in secondary classrooms. Topics will include
literacy in the content area, motivation, management techniques, and math/science-specific
teaching strategies. Topics discussed will be implemented through an imbedded field that
will require math and science preservice teachers to demonstrate the implementation of
topics.
Students will also complete an advanced examination of Educational
professionalism and ethics. Prerequisite: Education 375.
Semester course, two hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 163

EDUC 318. PHYSICAL EDUCATION FOR ELEMENTARY EDUCATORS. The
purpose of this class is to introduce the students to a basic overview of elementary physical
education in order that they become advocates of physical education and learn to integrate
movement education within their classrooms.
Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 319. THE USE OF ART IN THE CLASSROOM. A study of materials and
methods of instruction in art for the elementary and preschool including topics in the theory
and practice of teaching art. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 323. TEACHING PRIMARY AND ELEMENTARY LITERACY. A course
designed to acquaint future elementary and early childhood teachers with strategies for
developing emergent literacy in reading and the integrated language arts. Topics include
methods to develop print awareness, decoding ability, and reading extended text. The course
will also explore the developmental continuum of language and literacy, including writing,
speaking, listening, visualizing and viewing. Direct field experience is required in the
elementary school where students will utilize assessment techniques, plan lessons, and use
a variety of approaches and materials in instructing students. Prerequisites: Sophomore
standing elementary and special education majors, junior elementary education and middle
level majors, or with special permission from the course instructor and completion of
Education 202, 215, Psychology 102, and one other methods course. Elementary Education,
Middle Level Education, and Special Education majors only.
Fall semester only, three hours.
EDUC 324. TEACHING ELEMENTARY SOCIAL SCIENCES. A study of resources
and methods of teaching PreK-8 social studies including history, geography, civics, and
economics. This course also emphasizes the development of competencies associated with
the use of audio-visual equipment and materials. Directed field experience in the elementary
and middle schools is required. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing.
Semester course, three hours.
EDUC 325. TEACHING ELEMENTARY SCIENCE AND HEALTH. A course of
instruction in methods of teaching PreK-8 science, health, and physical education. Includes
classroom development of competencies in the planning and use of hands-on materials and
application in classroom instruction. Directed field experience in the elementary and middle
schools is required. Prerequisite: sophomore standing.
Semester course, three hours.
EDUC 326. TEACHING UPPER ELEMENTARY/MIDDLE LITERACY. A course
designed to acquaint elementary, early childhood, and English education majors about
methods to teach literacy (reading and the integrated language arts) to upper elementary and
middle school level students. Topics include methods to develop vocabulary knowledge,
comprehension, expressive writing, and content area reading. Direct field experience in
elementary or middle schools is required. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing for PreK4 majors, or special permission from course instructor; elementary majors must have
completed Education 202, 323, 327; and Psychology 102; English majors must have
sophomore standing and must have completed Education 202, and Psychology 102.
Restricted to elementary education, English Secondary Education Certification, and Middle
Level majors only.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EDUC 327. TEACHING ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS. Elementary mathematics
concepts and pedagogy will be introduced within the framework of the curriculum and
evaluation standards recommended by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Mathematical strands to be explored include geometry; measurement; number sense; whole

164 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

number operations; patterns and functions; fraction and decimal operations; graphing;
statistics; and probability. A strong emphasis will be placed on problem solving as a skill
needed to make informed decisions about life. All concepts will be taught with a dependence
on manipulative activities. The scope of the course goes from early childhood to
adolescence. A structured field experience is embedded within the course. It is strongly
recommended that this course be completed before taking additional three-credit elementary
methods courses. Prerequisite: Mathematics 151 and Sophomore standing.
Semester course, three hours.
EDUC 328. CHILDREN'S LITERATURE AND LANGUAGE. A survey of children’s
literature for early childhood, intermediate, and middle grades with an extensive
representation of books from classic and contemporary authors and illustrators. Major
literary genres are studied, story-telling techniques are discussed, and issues in literature for
children are explored. Additionally, the course discusses the linguistic development in
children that is fostered through exposure to literature. Open to PreK-4 and middle
certification majors only. Priority given to PreK-4 majors. Prerequisite: Psychology 102.
Semester course, two hours.
EDUC 329. MIDDLE LEVEL CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION. This course
provides middle level certification candidates with an in-depth study of middle level
education that focuses on meeting the needs of adolescent learners. Topics will include the
role of collaboration in departmentalized middle level programs, adolescent guidance,
management of the learning environment, and school governance in middle and junior high
settings. Prerequisite: Psychology 102.
Fall semester only, three hours.
EDUC 330. LITERATURE AND WRITING FOR THE SECONDARY
CLASSROOM. A course designed to familiarize the student with both theoretical and
practical aspects of teaching literature and writing used at the secondary level. Included will
be a discussion of literature selection, treatment of the material, and writing assessment
procedures. Traditional works will be emphasized. Prerequisites: Education 202 and
Psychology 102.
Fall semester only, three hours.
EDUC 342. EARLY CHILDHOOD CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION. This
course provides an overview of all curriculum components essential for operating an early
childhood classroom with a focus on preschool and primary environments. Major
curriculum approaches explored and implemented in early childhood settings include a
traditional structured approach, a thematic approach, and the project approach. An
awareness of learning styles, diversity, and special needs are integral to effective planning.
The role of assessment in the curriculum sequence is included. Students are required to
implement curriculum approaches in selected sites. Sophomore or junior level course.
Prerequisites: Education 281 and Psychology 102.
Semester course, three hours.
EDUC 343. TRENDS AND ISSUES IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION. This
course examines contemporary trends and issues surrounding early childhood education
discussing sociological, psychological, political, and economic forces shaping
contemporary families, children, and schooling. Current educational practices, curriculum,
and administration of programs are integral topics included in this study. Senior level
course. Prerequisites: Education 281 or Special Education 203, and Education 342.
Semester course, three hours.
EDUC 350. EDUCATION FOR THE MISSION FIELD. This course seeks to provide
students with the opportunity to learn more about the philosophy and structure of

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 165

international, missional, and national schools. A strong focus will be provided on how to
partner with nationals to advance their own teaching abilities. Students will have the
opportunity to interact with several alumni who are currently teaching on the mission field.
The final component of the course will be a service-learning project for a mission school.
Alternate years, spring semester only, one hour.
EDUC 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. A course designed to permit students to do
advanced study or to participate in educational experiences that provide an opportunity for
professional and/or educational self-improvement. Junior standing, permission of the
department chair and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or seven hours.
EDUC 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in education. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EDUC 371. SECONDARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (FIRST LEVEL). An internship
course designed to help pre-service secondary and K-12 teachers observe and collaborate
with experienced teachers to gain the knowledge and practice necessary to effectively teach
in a secondary classroom. Key components include actively observing and critically
reflecting upon elements of successful planning and preparation, classroom environment,
instructional delivery, professional conduct, assessment, and knowledge of diverse learners.
Prerequisites: Education 202 and Psychology 102.
Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 375. SECONDARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (THIRD LEVEL). An internship
course designed to help pre-service secondary and K-12 teachers actively collaborate with
experienced teachers to gain the knowledge and practice necessary to effectively teach in a
secondary classroom. Included in this collaboration is successful planning and preparation
that meets the needs of diverse learners and is closely tied to assessment practices, the
maintenance of an effective learning environment through the examination and
implementation of successful classroom management strategies, the use of effective
instructional delivery techniques, the demonstration of professional conduct, and the
knowledge of professional development opportunities and requirements. Prerequisite:
Education 215. To be taken concurrent with Education 316 or 317.
Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 381. ELEMENTARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (FIRST LEVEL). An internship
course designed to permit students to engage in a thirty to forty-hour entry-level field
experience in an elementary school. Field experience interns observe experienced teachers
in classroom settings noting organizational structures, curriculum issues, and students’
development. Diverse educational settings are strongly encouraged. Prerequisite:
Psychology 102.
Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 382. ELEMENTARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (SECOND LEVEL). An
internship course designed to permit students to engage in thirty to forty hours of
observational and participatory field experience in an elementary school. Field experience
interns observe teachers in classroom settings and assume some level of teaching
responsibility. Diverse educational settings are strongly recommended. Prerequisite:
Education 381. Corequisite: Education 323.
Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 383. ELEMENTARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (THIRD LEVEL). An internship
course designed to permit students to engage in thirty to forty hours of observational and
participatory field experience in an elementary school. Field experience interns observe

166 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

teachers in classroom settings and assume some level of teaching responsibility. Diverse
educational settings are strongly recommended. Prerequisite: Education 382.
Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 385. EARLY CHILDHOOD FIELD EXPERIENCE (SECOND LEVEL). This
one-credit second field experience is an internship course designed to permit students who
desire to gain additional experience working with young children to engage in a semesterlong field experience in the Early Education Center. Sophomore or junior level course.
Prerequisite: Education 281.
Semester course, one hour.
EDUC 386. EARLY CHILDHOOD FIELD EXPERIENCE (THIRD LEVEL). This
two-credit third field experience is an internship course designed to permit students more
in-depth experience in studying and teaching young children. Students may choose between
Education 385 and 386 for a second field experience in early childhood. Sophomore or
junior level course. Prerequisites: Education 281 and 385.
Semester course, two hours.
EDUC 387. FIELD EXPERIENCE IN EDUCATION. A field-based course designed to
permit students to engage in approximately twenty-one hours of field experience that fulfills
the requirements of a Level I, Level II, or Level III field experience course. With instructor
approval, this course may substitute for Education 371, 372, 373, 381, 382, or 383.
Prerequisite: Education 202, Education 205, or Psychology 102. With instructor permission
the course may be taken more than once.
Intersession or online term only, one hour.
EDUC 390. STUDIES: SPECIAL TOPICS COURSE. This course is taught by a visiting
scholar from the field of education. The topic for each course will vary from year to year.
The course will consist of a minimum of two two-hour lectures on the topic plus a paper of
specified length related to the topic. Prerequisite: Junior or senior education majors.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EDUC 450. STUDENT TEACHING. Preservice teacher certification candidates (seniors
only) are provided a one semester course in student teaching at local public schools. The
course runs five days per week for an entire semester. Additionally, student teachers must
attend a student teacher practicum session per week as the course syllabus dictates.
Prerequisites: Senior standing and completion of all methodology courses required before
student teaching. Departmental approval and permission required.
One semester course, sixteen hours.
EDUC 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. A course designed to permit students to do
advanced study or to participate in educational experiences that provide an opportunity for
professional and/or educational self-improvement. Senior standing, permission of the
department chair and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or seven hours.
EDUC 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in education. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EDUC 480. INTERNSHIP IN EDUCATION. An opportunity for junior or senior level
education majors to participate in approved experiences that provide extraordinary
leadership roles in applying educational theory to practice, under the supervision of an onsite manager and a department faculty member. Products of the internship include a log,
evaluation by the on-site manager, and all other requirements established within the faculty
approved Contract of Expected Responsibilities and Outcomes. Prerequisites: Acceptable

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 167

standing within the Education Department and permission of the Chair or Associate Chair
of the Education Department.
Semester course, one to six hours.
EDUC 488. SEMINAR: ISSUES IN EDUCATION. A capstone course for senior
credential candidates that examines the major philosophical, historical, social, political, and
psychological issues as they impact the teaching profession. Contemporary issues,
successful practices, and curricular approaches will be studied as the student considers
possible solutions to various crises facing American education. This course satisfies the
Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI) and Information Literacy (IL) requirement
for all education majors.
Semester course, three hours.

Special Education (SEDU)
SEDU 101. EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS. This course is a foundational study of the
characteristics, etiology, and psychological and educational needs of individuals eligible for
special education services, focusing on the implication of such needs on the educator and
meeting of individual needs in a standards-aligned system. The course also introduces
students to the processes, professionals, and strategies for identifying individual needs and
the establishment and delivery of required special education services. An embedded special
education field experience is part of this course. Prerequisites: Psychology 102 and
appropriate clearances.
Semester course, three hours.
SEDU 102. EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS FOR 7-12 & K-12. This course is a
foundational study of the characteristics, etiology, and psychological and educational needs
of individuals eligible for special education services, focusing on the implication of such
needs on the educator and meeting of individual needs in a standards-aligned system. The
course also briefly introduces pre-service teachers to the processes, professionals, and
strategies for identifying individual needs and the establishment & delivery of required
special education services. A particular focus will be on the implementation of
identification, implementation, and inclusion in the secondary classroom. Prerequisite:
Education 215.
Semester course, two hours.
SEDU 103. METHODS OF SECONDARY SPECIAL EDUCATION
IMPLEMENTATION. The course is an expansion and implementation of previous
coursework for K-12, 7-12 and Special Education Majors that will focus on co-teaching,
full inclusion, assessment writing & modification, and co-curricular experiences.
Prerequisite: Education 215. It is acceptable to take Special Education 102 and 103
concurrently.
Semester course, one hour.
SEDU 202. APPLIED BEHAVIORAL ANALYSIS. Topics include assessment and
intervention with a focus on ethics and methods to increase and decrease behaviors. Students
will carry out behavioral analyses and intervention to design and implement individual and
group behavior plans for special education populations while gaining proficiency in
developing pro-social behaviors and in direct instruction to explicitly teach appropriate
social skills and communication. Furthermore, students will implement intervention
strategies appropriately in compliance with IEP goals with respect for student safety and
individual needs. Prerequisites: Psychology 102, Special Education 101, and appropriate
clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite:
Special Education 203.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SEDU 203. SPECIAL EDUCATION SYSTEMS AND PROCESSES/FIELD
EXPERIENCE LEVEL I. This field experience-based course will provide the prospective

168 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

teacher with opportunities to interact and instruct students with Special Education labels as
they work with both Regular Education and Special Education teachers. Student-interns
enrolled in this field will function as skilled observers/explorers and pre-student teacher
tutors as they collect information and prepare and deliver lessons to small groups and
individual students while spending at least 35 hours in the field, focusing on the special
education process, LRE, Participation in a Standards Aligned Curriculum, and Behavioral
Interventions. Prerequisites: Psychology 102, Special Education 101, and appropriate
clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite:
Special Education 202, as assignments from that course will be tied to this field experience.
Fall semester only, one hour.
SEDU 204. EDUCATIONAL ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL EDUCATION. This is an
in-depth study of the tools and processes used in identification of and programming for the
Exceptional Population. Expertise will be developed in the implementation of unbiased
multiple-layered assessment tools and their subsequent application in IEP programming.
Students will become proficient in providing and evaluating in-depth authentic, benchmark,
diagnostic, formative, screening, and summative assessment data related to meeting the
needs of those being considered for or identified within the special education population.
Prerequisites: Psychology 102, Special Education 101, and appropriate clearances and
standing in the certification program at Grove City College.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SEDU 205. CONSULTATION, LITIGATION, AND TRANSITION. Students will
prepare skills for building productive professional interactions with parents, educators,
service providers, and community professionals. Additionally, historical cases and current
litigation will be studied to enable students to design and implement programs that provide
full procedural safeguards to all constituents while gaining expertise in aligning resources,
securing providers, and mediating forces to provide for the full spectrum of support services
both legally and ethically. Prerequisites: Psychology 102, Special Education 101, and
clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SEDU 306. SUPPORTIVE SERVICES AND TECHNOLOGY / FIELD
EXPERIENCE LEVEL II. This field experience-based course will provide the studentintern with opportunities to interact and instruct students with Special Education Labels as
they work with both Regular Education and Special Education teachers. Specifically, this
experience will be selected to provide a 25-hour experience with students receiving special
education services under the labels of moderate to severely handicapped. Prerequisites:
Psychology 102; Special Education 101, 202, 203, 204, 205; and appropriate clearances and
standing in the certification program at Grove City College. Corequisite: Special Education
307, as assignments from that course will be tied to this field experience.
Fall semester only, one hour.
SEDU 307. EVIDENCE BASED INSTRUCTION OF LOW INCIDENCE
DISABILITIES Students will develop advanced skills in meeting the needs of special
education students with labels of Autistic, Visually Impaired/Blind, Hearing Impaired/Deaf,
Multiple Handicapped, Severe Disabilities, Orthopedic Impairments, and Traumatic Brain
Injury. Students will demonstrate knowledge of facilitating inclusion, managing the
environment, and the use of available technology to design and implement programs, while
continuously monitoring progress, providing remediation and compensation techniques,
and providing alternative routes to achievement across all areas of the continuum of
services. Prerequisites: Psychology 102; Special Education 101, 202, 203, 204, 205; and

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 169

appropriate clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College.
Corequisite: Special Education 306.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SEDU 308. READING DISABILITIES. This is an advanced level course in literacy
methods aimed at preparing students to meet the needs of the special education population
who experience difficulty in literacy development. Students will study research-based
findings related to the causes and research-based strategies on ameliorating such difficulties.
Key components of the course focus on the appropriate use of materials, assessment
instruments, teaching strategies, and a variety of service delivery models to optimize the
success of individual students. This course also includes an ongoing clinical field experience
throughout the semester in which students will collaborate with a practicing special educator
of reading specialist to work with a student with literacy needs. Prerequisites: Psychology
102, Special Education 101 or 102, Education 323; and appropriate clearances and standing
in the certification program at Grove City College.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SEDU 309. EVIDENCE BASED INSTRUCTION OF HIGH INCIDENCE
DISABILITIES. Students will develop advanced skills in meeting the needs of special
education students with labels of Learning Disabled, Speech and Language Impaired,
Intellectually Disabled, Seriously Emotionally Disturbed, and Attention Deficit Disorder
(Other Health Impaired). Students will demonstrate knowledge of facilitating inclusion,
managing the environment, and the use of available technology to design and implement
programs. As appropriate, students will provide Education / 179 integrated learning
experiences, multiple instructional approaches, and evidence-based decisions.
Prerequisites: Psychology 102; Special Education 306, 307; Education 323, 326; and
appropriate clearances and standing in the certification program at Grove City College.
Corequisite: Special Education 310.
Spring semester only, three credits.
SEDU 412. PRACTICUM OF PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT. As an extension
of the student teaching experience, student teachers will participate in a practicum
experience including course work, assignments, and interaction with the college supervisor
while exploring topics that are important to the development of the Professional Special
Educator. Thus, the course will support the student teacher in applying theory to practice
during the student teaching experience. Additionally, topics of professional responsibilities,
confidentiality issues, and current issues in special education will be discussed. Corequisite:
Special Education 411.
Semester course, one hour.
INTEGRATIVE SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY ENGINEERING AND
MATHEMATICS K-12 ENDORSEMENT PROGRAM
(INTEGRATIVE STEM ENDORSEMENT)
EDUC 410 (Undergraduate) / 510 (Post-baccalaureate). INTEGRATIVE STEM FOR
EARLY CHILDHOOD AND ELEMENTARY SCHOOL. This course focuses on
STEM topics, methods, curriculum and instruction for school students in early childhood
grades PreK-4 and elementary school settings. In this course, students will (a) Gain
exposure to the standards knowledge of standards that are pivotal in the STEM field,
(b) Explore how STEM can be involved in other disciplines and used in cross curricular
activities and lessons, and (c ) Explore inquiry-based teaching and learning methodologies
to teach STEM topics - explore each topic (science, technology, engineering, and math)
individually and explore methodologies that work within each topic area. In addition,
students will participate in a field component where they will design, implement, and reflect
using the reflective teaching model on lessons and units that incorporate an integrative
STEM learning cycle approach and developmentally appropriate methodology for PREK-4

170 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

students. This course is in partial fulfillment of the STEM endorsement from PDE.
Semester course, online only, three hours.
EDUC 411 (Undergraduate) / 511 (Post-baccalaureate). INTEGRATIVE STEM FOR
ADOLESCENT AND MIDDLE SCHOOL. This course focuses on STEM topics,
methods, curriculum and instruction for school students in grades 4-8. The course is
designed for candidates seeking an endorsement in Integrative Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics Education. In this course, students will (a) Apply knowledge
of standards that are pivotal in the STEM field, (b) Create cross curricular lessons, and (c)
Apply inquiry-based teaching and learning methodologies to teach STEM topics. In
addition, students will participate in a field component where they will design, implement,
and reflect using the reflective teaching model on lessons and units that incorporate an
integrative STEM learning cycle approach and developmentally appropriate methodology
for 4-8 students. Prerequisite: EDUC 510. This course is in partial fulfillment of the STEM
endorsement from Pennsylvania Department of Education.
Semester course, online only, three hours.
EDUC 412 (Undergraduate) / 512 (Post-baccalaureate). INTEGRATIVE STEM FOR
SECONDARY AND HIGH SCHOOL. This course focuses on STEM topics, methods,
curriculum and instruction for school students in secondary settings, grades 9-12. In this
course, students will (a) utilize their knowledge of the standards to create and implement
lesson plans in the field, (b) Explore hot topics in STEM education such as robotics and 3D
printing (c) Gain hands on experience with technology tools related to STEM education. In
addition, students will participate in a field component where they will design, implement,
and reflect using the reflective teaching model on lessons and units that incorporate an
integrative STEM learning cycle approach and developmentally appropriate methodology
for 9-12 students. Prerequisite: EDUC 511. This course is in partial fulfillment of the
STEM endorsement from Pennsylvania Department of Education.
Semester course, online only, three hours.
EDUC 413 (Undergraduate) / 513 (Post-baccalaureate). STEM PRACTICUM AND
APPLIED LEADERSHIP. A capstone course designed to integrate previously learned
concepts in other STEM endorsement classes through a long-range service project and
teaching experience in a PreK-12 setting. The course is designed to develop the ability to
endorsement candidates to integrate previously learned content and dispositions to have a
dynamic impact on schools and the field of education. Critical course components include
engagement with STEM community partners from business and industry outside of the
PreK-12 settings, developing recourses for the PreK-12 setting, and furthering the
promotion of STEM teaching and learning as an instructional leader. The course covers
broad themes: STEM in Society and Professions, STEM Education, and STEM Educational
Leadership. The capstone course will be structured with a weekly practicum meeting for
the total cohort, but the individual students will each be partnered with a STEM cooperating
educator or cooperating school administrator AND a mentor professor from institution. The
STEM capstone class is a rigorous internship for the educator in a high school, middle
school, intermediate, primary, and/or early childhood classroom. All placements must be
approved by the course instructor. This course is in partial fulfillment of the STEM
endorsement from PDE.
Semester course, online only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 171

Electrical and Computer Engineering
Dr. Brooks, Chair; Dr. M. W. Bright, Dr. Christman, Dr. Mohr, Dr. Rumbaugh.
Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. Brian Montgomery.
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Mission Statement,
Objectives, and Outcomes
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) is the analysis, design, and application of
devices and systems for conversion, processing, and transmission of electrical energy and
information. Electrical and Computer Engineering at Grove City College now covers such
basic topics as electric circuits, electronics, electrical machines, signal analysis, and digital
systems; as well as advanced topics in communication systems, computer systems, and
control systems. Electrical and computer engineers practice in a variety of professional
duties including research, design and development, management, sales, field service,
testing, manufacturing, and education.
The Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at Grove City College offers a
program leading to the Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering (BSEE) degree. The
electrical engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission
of ABET, http://www.abet.org.
Proficiency in writing and speaking skills is essential to a productive career in any
branch of Electrical and Computer Engineering. To that end, all majors take Electrical
Engineering 401 (Electrical/Computer Engineering Design), as a Writing Intensive (WI)
and Speaking Intensive (SI) course. In addition, all graduates need to know how to obtain,
evaluate, and use technical information related to the field of Electrical and Computer
Engineering. Instruction and practice in these Information Literacy (IL) skills is provided in
the combination of the following required courses: Electrical Engineering 202, 251, and
351.
1.

2.

3.

Electrical Engineering Program Educational Objectives
Graduates will be active in the electrical engineering profession or an alternative
field consistent with their God-given calling. Many of our graduates will assume
leadership roles as a result of having demonstrated strong technical abilities as
well as communication and team skills.
Graduates will set career goals and engage in life-long learning through self-study,
continuing education courses, and/or formal graduate education in order to reach
those goals.
Graduates will demonstrate ethical behavior in the workplace and will carry out
their professional duties in a manner that is consistent with a Christian life
perspective.

Student Outcomes
To ensure fulfillment of the ECE Department objectives, graduates of the EE program
shall demonstrate:
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics.
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global,
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors.
3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences.
4. an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts.

172 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

5.

6.
7.

an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan
tasks, and meet objectives.
an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions.
an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate
learning strategies.

Inherent in the ECE curriculum at Grove City College is the inculcation of design
experience. Engineering design is the process of devising a system, component, or process
to meet desired needs. It is a decision-making process applying basic science, mathematics,
and engineering science to use available resources to optimally meet stated objectives. In
the EE program, engineering design is assured via design problems and projects integrated
throughout the ECE curriculum.
Freshman Year-The Introduction to Engineering (ENGR 156) course introduces the
profession of engineering and the design process. Students work in teams on a design project
and present results in written and oral reports. For Mechanical Engineering students, this
course is taken concurrently with ENGR 120.
Sophomore and Junior Years-ECE students are afforded additional opportunities to
solve relevant design problems through homework and group design projects in various
courses in the sophomore and junior years. Design projects that incorporate course-specific
topics along with techniques introduced in the freshman Introduction to Engineering course
are assigned in Digital Logic Design (ELEE 204), Electric Machines (ELEE 303), and
Microcontrollers with Robotic Applications (ELEE 310), and other courses as appropriate.
These projects are presented in written and/or oral reports.
Senior Year-The integrated design experience in ECE at Grove City College
culminates in the senior year with the capstone design project. The capstone design
experience comprises a combination of research and proposal writing in
Electrical/Computer Engineering Design (ELEE 401) and Capstone Design Laboratory I
(ENGR or ROBO 451) in the fall semester of the senior year and hands-on implementation
and documentation of that design in Capstone Design Laboratory II (ENGR or ROBO 452)
in the spring semester. The project must incorporate one or more advanced topics chosen
from the senior-level stem sequences in Communication Systems, Computer Systems, or
Control Systems (students choosing the CE concentration must include the Computer
Systems sequence). Since stem courses build on fundamentals presented in previous ECE
courses, the capstone project assures that all ECE graduates complete a major design
experience drawing on fundamental concepts as well as advanced ECE topics. While seniors
are asked to present various oral and written updates throughout the capstone experience,
the climax comes in the second semester of the senior year when students present oral and
written reports to the public, including engineering professionals from nearby industries.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Computer Engineering—98
hours
Computer Engineering Core (58 hours)
Electrical Engineering 201, 204, 251, 252, 301, 310, 321, 351, 401, 441, 442;
Computer Science 141, 220, 222, 340, 342, 350, 448; Engineering 130, 156, 301,
402, 451, 452

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 173

Technical Elective Requirement (6 hours)
Choose six hours from any 200-400 level ELEE, COMP, ENGR, or ROBO course
(excluding ELEE 210 and COMP 205).
Math/ Science Core (34 hours)
Mathematics 213, 214, 161, 162, 261, 262; Physics 101, 102; Engineering 120.
FOUR-YEAR PLAN for Computer Engineering
1st 2nd
Sem. Sem.
4 4
4 4
3 3
- 1
- 3
2
3
16 15

1st 2nd
SOPHOMORE YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Mathematics 261-262
4
3
Electrical Engineering 201-204
3
3
Electrical Engineering 251-252
1
1
Computer Science 220
3
Electrical Engineering 321
3
Engineering 130
2
Humanities 200-202
3
3
Mathematics 214
4
16 17

1st
2nd
JUNIOR YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Electrical Engineering 301-310
3 3
Electrical Engineering 351
1
Computer Science 222- 340
3 3
Mathematics 213
4
Computer Science 342
- 3
Foundations of Social Science
3
Technical Elective
- 3
Humanities 301-303
3 3
Engineering 301
- 1
17 16

1st 2nd
SENIOR YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Electrical Engineering 401
3
Electrical Engineering 441- 442 3
3
Engineering 402
3
Engineering 451-452
1
1
Computer Science 448-350
3
3
Technical Elective
3
General Elective
3
3
SSFT course
2
16 15

FRESHMAN YEAR
Mathematics 161-162
Physics 101-102
Humanities 102 - Writing 101
Physical Education 100
Computer Science 141
Engineering 156
Engineering 120

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Electrical Engineering—99100 hours
Electrical Engineering/Computer Core (28 hours)
Computer Science 141; Electrical Engineering 201, 204, 251, 252, 301, 304, 321,
351, 401; Engineering or Robotics 451 and 452.
Engineering Core (7 hours)
Engineering 120, 156, 301, 402
Math/Science Core (30-31 hours)
Chemistry 105 or Biology 101; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262; Engineering 274 or
Mathematics 214; and Physics 101 and 102.
Concentration Area—choose one:
Electrical Engineering Concentration (EEEE)— (34 hours):
• Electrical Engineering 202, 302, 303, and 352 (10 hours).

174 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

• Math/science elective (3-4 hours): Choose one course from the following:
Astronomy 206, 207; Biology 101, 102; Chemistry 227, 241, 345; Mathematics
210, 213, 222, 331; Physics 234, or 402.
• Technical electives* (15 hours): Select 15 hours from any 200-400 level
Electrical Engineering, Engineering, Robotics, Mechanical Engineering, or
Computer Science course, excluding Electrical Engineering 210 and Computer
Science 205.
• Advanced electives* (6 hours): Select six hours from Electrical Engineering 404,
432, 442, or Engineering 412.
Computer Engineering Concentration (EECE)— (33 hours):
• Electrical Engineering 310, 441, 442; Computer Science 220, 222, 340 (18 hours)
• Math/science elective (3 hours): Choose one course from the following:
Astronomy 206, 207; Biology 102; Chemistry 227, 241, 345; Mathematics 210,
213, 222, Statistics 331; Physics 234, or 402.
• Technical electives* (9 hours): Select 9 hours from any 200-400 level Electrical
Engineering, Engineering, Robotics, Mechanical Engineering, or Computer
Science course, excluding Electrical Engineering 210 and Computer Science
205.
• Advanced elective* (3 hours): Select one of Electrical Engineering 404, 432, or
Engineering 412.
*No course can be used to satisfy both the technical and advanced elective
requirements.
Courses that count in the Electrical Engineering major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ELEE” and “ROBO” prefix; ENGR 390; COMP 141, 220, 222, 340,
and 450. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
FOUR-YEAR PLAN for ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING CONCENTRATION
1st 2nd
FRESHMAN YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Mathematics 161-162
4 4
Physics 101
- 4
Humanities 102 - Writing 101
3 3
Physical Education 100
- 1
Computer Science 141
- 3
Engineering 156
2
Chemistry 105 or Biology 101
4
Engineering 120
3
16 15

1st 2nd
SOPHOMORE YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Mathematics 261-262
4
3
Physics 102
4
Electrical Engineering 201-202
3
3
Electrical Engineering 204
3
Electrical Engineering 251-252
1
1
Electrical Engineering 321
3
Math/Science Elective
3
Humanities 200
3
SSFT course
2
17 16

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 175

JUNIOR YEAR
Electrical Engineering 301-302
Electrical Engineering 303-304
Electrical Engineering 351-352
Engineering 301
Technical Electives
Math 214 or Engineering 274
Foundations of Social Science
Humanities 301-202

3 3
3 3
1 1
1
3 3
- 3-4
3
3 3
17 17

SENIOR YEAR
Electrical Engineering 401
Engineering 451-452
Engineering 402
Technical Electives
Advanced Electives
Humanities 303
General Electives

3
1
6
5
15

3
1
3
6
3
16

FOUR-YEAR PLAN for COMPUTER ENGINEERING CONCENTRATION
1st 2nd
FRESHMAN YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Mathematics 161-162
4 4
Physics 101
- 4
Humanities 102 - Writing 101
3 3
Physical Education 100
- 1
Computer Science 141
- 3
Engineering 156
2
Chemistry 105 or Biology 101
4
Engineering 120
3
16 15

1st 2nd
SOPHOMORE YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Mathematics 261-262
4
3
Physics 102
4
Electrical Engineering 201
3
Electrical Engineering 204
3
Electrical Engineering 251-252
1
1
Electrical Engineering 321
3
Computer Science 220-222
3
3
Humanities 200
3
SSFT course
2
17 16

1st
2nd
JUNIOR YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Electrical Engineering 301-310
3 3
Electrical Engineering 351
1
Computer Science 222- 340
3 3
Mathematics 213
4
Computer Science 342
- 3
Foundations of Social Science
3
Technical Elective
- 3
Humanities 301-303
3 3
Engineering 301
- 1
17 16

1st 2nd
SENIOR YEAR
Sem. Sem.
Electrical Engineering 401
3
Electrical Engineering 441- 442 3
3
Engineering 402
3
Engineering 451-452
1
1
Computer Science 448-350
3
3
Technical Elective
3
General Elective
3
3
SSFT course
2
16 15

Course Requirements for a minor in Robotics (19-20 hours)
A minor in Robotics will consist of Robotics 301, 302; Engineering 301; a 3-4 credit
robotics-related capstone project; and nine hours from Computer Science 445, Electrical
Engineering 310, Engineering 411, Engineering 412, Mechanical Engineering 316, or
Mechanical Engineering 410 or Engineering 390 Introduction to Mechatronics.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

176 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Engineering Core Courses (ENGR)
ENGR 120. NUMERICAL COMPUTING FOR ENGINEERS. This course introduces
students to applied numerical computation, with an emphasis on solving typical engineering
problems. Sequential logic programming is taught using MATLAB. Topics include array
and scalar operators, program control elements, graphic and text I/O, internal and userdefined functions. Students are introduced to numerical methods such as root finding,
solutions to systems of linear equations, linear regression, and numerical integration and
differentiation. For mechanical engineering students, this course is taken concurrently with
ENGR 156. Corequisites: Mathematics 161 and Physics 101. Semester course, three hours.
ENGR 130. INTRODUCTION TO C ENGINEERING. This course provides an
understanding of hardware and software concepts, structured program design, and
programming using C. Topics include basic data structures, control flow, functions, memory
allocation, threading, I/O, and manipulation of hardware components. Students will
program in a microprocessor environment and in a Linux environment.
Fall semester
course, two hours.
ENGR 156. INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING. Introduces students to the
engineering profession and the design process. Course lectures and assignments include the
design process; problem definition and solution; oral and written communications; group
dynamics; public responsibility; current global engineering challenges; and engineering
ethics. A group design project is required. For mechanical engineering students, this course
is taken concurrently with Engineering 120.
Semester course, two hours.
ENGR 274. MATHEMATICAL METHODS IN ENGINEERING. A course for
engineering and science majors covering selected topics in probability and statistics, linear
algebra, discrete mathematics, and numerical methods as applied to the solution of problems
in engineering and science. Students who receive credit for Mathematics 213, 222, and
Statistics 331 may not receive credit for Engineering 274. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.
Semester course, three hours.
ENGR 301. ETHICS IN ENGINEERING AND ROBOTICS. This course investigates
ethical decision-making from a Christian perspective as it applies to engineering and
robotics. It includes an overview of approaches to ethical decision-making, as well as
particular issues raised by the robotics field, such as robots making military decisions,
privacy issues with in-home robots, issues with emotional bonds, etc.
Semester course, one hour.
ENGR 390. SPECIAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in the areas of new
engineering development based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject
matter varies each semester with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of
registration.
Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
ENGR 401. CAPTSONE DESIGN SEQUENCE. Completion of a senior design project.
A study of the application of scientific and engineering principles towards a design problem
that impact societal needs. Including problem identification, detailed design solution,
fabrication, decision making, teamwork, engineering economics, analysis and verification
of performance, and societal impact. Prerequisites: Senior standing in Science or
Engineering.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ENGR 402. ENGINEERING ECONOMY. Principles and methods for analyzing the
economic feasibility of engineering projects including interest, depreciation, rate-of-return,

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 177

economic life, replacement costs, and comparison of alternative designs. Aspects of this
course will be involved in the final phase of Senior Capstone projects. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 141 or 161; junior or senior standing.
Spring semester only, one hour.
ENGR 411. CONTROL SYSTEMS. A study of the design and analysis of feedback
control systems using classical techniques. Topics include modeling of mechanical and
electrical dynamic systems, a review of Laplace transform techniques, steady-state error,
transient response, stability, root locus design methods, Bode analysis/stability margins, and
Bode compensator design. Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations and hands-on projects.
Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 210 or 201; Mechanical Engineering 316 or Electrical
Engineering 321; and Engineering 274, Mathematics 214, or Mathematics 222.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGR 412. MODERN CONTROL THEORY. Analysis and design of feedback control
systems using modern control modeling and design techniques. Topics include state space
modeling of mechanical and electrical systems, design of state-space controllers and
observers, Kalman filtering, and an introduction to advanced topics such as robust control,
optimal control (LGR/LQG), and others. Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations and
hands-on projects. Prerequisite: Engineering 411.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGR 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN LABORATORY I. An advanced lab course requiring
the student to complete the senior group design project. For electrical engineering majors,
this will include performing experiments in control systems, digital communication
systems, and initiation of work with the senior design team. For mechanical engineering
majors, this will include 3-D computer-aided design and manufacturing techniques and
experiments related to the senior project. Written reports and oral presentations are
required. Engineering 451 is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Speaking Intensive
(SI) course for Engineering majors. Prerequisites: Senior standing in Engineering.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ENGR 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN LABORATORY II. An advanced lab course
requiring student teams to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral
presentations are required. Engineering 452 is designed to fulfill the requirements for
Speaking Intensive (SI) course for Engineering majors. Prerequisites: Senior standing
Engineering and ENGR 451.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGR 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENGINEERING. An opportunity for junior or senior
engineering majors to participate in an extended work experience (six months or more)
under the supervision of an on-site manager and a department faculty member. Products of
the internship will include an evaluation by the on-site manager, a journal of the internship
experience, and a paper describing the experience and relating it to academic theory. This
course may be repeated a maximum of three times. Prerequisite: Permission from the
department chair.
Semester course, one hour.

Electrical Engineering (ELEE)
ELEE 201. LINEAR CIRCUITS I. An introduction to the analysis and design of electrical
circuits composed of linear elements. The course begins with time domain analysis of the
steady state and transient behavior of linear circuits and progresses to sinusoidal steady state
analysis using the phasor method. Computers are introduced as an aid to analysis and design
of circuits via the use of circuit simulation software. Prerequisites: Mathematics 162.
Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 251.
Fall semester only, three hours.

178 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

ELEE 202. LINEAR CIRCUITS II. Continued study in techniques for analyzing and
designing circuits composed of linear elements, including the Laplace Transform,
convolution, and Fourier analysis methods. Applications of linear circuits to electric power
systems and frequency selective systems are examined. Computers are used as an aid to
analysis and design via the use of circuit simulation software. Electrical Engineering 202 is
designed to fulfill the requirements for the Information Literacy (IL) instruction in the
Electrical and Computer Engineering curriculum. Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 201.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ELEE 204. DIGITAL LOGIC DESIGN. An introduction to digital circuit analysis and
design methods. Combinational circuit topics include the use of Boolean algebra, map
minimization methods, and circuit implementation with logic gates and standard integrated
circuits. Sequential circuit design is explored, and implementation with flip-flops and
standard integrated circuits is investigated. Programmable logic implementation of both
combinational and sequential circuits is introduced. A group design project is required.
Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 252.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ELEE 210. ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING. A survey for non-electrical engineering
majors covering the basic principles of circuit analysis, electronics, instrumentation, and
electromechanical energy conversion, with computer applications. Prerequisites:
Mathematics 162, Physics 102, and Engineering 120 or Computer Science 141.
Three hours.
ELEE 251. LINEAR CIRCUITS LABORATORY. A laboratory course intended to
acquaint the student with basic techniques of instrumentation, measurement, design, and
troubleshooting for linear analog circuits. Laboratory investigation of basic Electrical
Engineering concepts is integrated with design and implementation of practical circuits to
meet specifications. Electrical Engineering 251 is designed to fulfill the requirements for
the Information Literacy (IL) instruction in the Electrical and Computer Engineering
curriculum. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 201.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ELEE 252. DIGITAL CIRCUITS LABORATORY. A laboratory course intended to
acquaint the student with hardware and software tools used for the design and
implementation of digital circuits. A variety of digital design techniques are investigated,
including gate-level circuits, programmable FPGA devices, and hardware definition
languages (VHDL). CAD software, a hardware target system, and lab equipment are used
to design, simulate, program, and verify the operation of digital circuits. Computers are used
to design and simulate circuits and to program digital devices to implement those designs.
Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 204.
Spring semester only, one hour.
ELEE 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in electrical
engineering. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
One, two or three hours.
ELEE 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in electrical engineering. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair,
and a faculty sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 179

ELEE 301. ELECTRONICS I. A study of semiconductor device characteristics, diodes,
bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), field-effect transistors (FETs), BJT and FET amplifier
circuits, bias stability, and DC power supplies. Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 201
and Mathematics 262. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 351.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ELEE 302. ELECTRONICS II. A study of the frequency response characteristics of
transistor amplifiers, integrated-circuit operational amplifiers, fundamentals of feedback
and stability, oscillators, active filters, quasi-linear circuits, pulsed waveforms and timing
circuits. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 301. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 352.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ELEE 303. ELECTRICAL MACHINES. Theories of transformers, DC machines,
induction motors, synchronous motors and generators, stepping motors, and single-phase
motors are developed, and applications are explored. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering
202.
Three hours.
ELEE 304. ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY. Fundamentals of electromagnetic
theory, including static electric fields; dielectrics; energy and forces in the electric field;
magnetic fields in free space and in magnetic materials; time-varying fields; and Maxwell's
equations with applications. Computer techniques are used to solve a problem involving
Laplace's Equation. Prerequisite: Mathematics 262.
Three hours.
ELEE 306. DESIGN OF DIGITAL SYSTEMS. A study of semiconductor devices and
their use in digital integrated circuits. Characteristics of semiconductor devices will be
explored followed by an investigation of their application to the design of digital logic
circuits and systems. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 204.
Three hours.
ELEE 310. MICROCONTROLLERS WITH ROBOTIC APPLICATIONS. An
introduction to the skills required to design and program systems that incorporate embedded
microprocessors or microcontrollers. Topics include microprocessor circuitry and
architecture, programming using assembly and higher-level languages, and interfacing the
microprocessor with external devices. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites:
Electrical Engineering 201 or 210, and Electrical Engineering 204.
Three hours.
ELEE 321. SIGNAL ANALYSIS. The mathematical representation of continuous and
discrete systems including Fourier Series and transforms; Laplace transforms; z-transforms;
continuous and discrete convolution; and digital computer techniques such as FFT's and
digital filtering. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 201. Corequisite: Mathematics 262.
Three hours.
ELEE 351. INTERMEDIATE LABORATORY I. A hands-on experience in the use of
electronic devices including discrete active and passive components and sub-assemblies;
test equipment; and instrumentation. Assignments are oriented toward the analysis and
design of analog electronic circuits and systems. Computer software is used for circuit
simulation and analysis. Familiarization with the technical resources available in the library
is also provided. Electrical Engineering 351 is designed to fulfill the requirements for the
Information Literacy (IL) instruction in the Electrical and Computer Engineering
curriculum. Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 301.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ELEE 352. INTERMEDIATE LABORATORY II. A hands-on experience in the use of
electronic and electrical devices including transformers, motors, and generators as well as

180 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

discrete active and passive components, test equipment, and instrumentation. Assignments
are oriented toward the analysis and design of analog electronic circuits, networks, and
electrical machines. Computer software is used for circuit simulation and analysis.
Corequisites: Electrical Engineering 302.
Spring semester only, one hour.
ELEE 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in electrical
engineering. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
One, two or three hours.
ELEE 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in electrical engineering. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.
ELEE 390. SPECIAL TOPICS IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING. Special topics,
based on student demand and faculty interest, in the areas of new electrical engineering
development. Specific subject matter varies each semester. Prerequisites and credit hours
announced in advance of registration.
One, two, three, or four hours.
ELEE 401. ELECTRICAL/COMPUTER ENGINEERING DESIGN. A study of the
principles and methods of designing electrical/computer engineering systems in today's
society. The early stages of the design process are emphasized, including identifying needs,
requirements specification, planning and evaluating design alternatives. Engineering ethics,
including intellectual property, are a significant focus. The senior design project is initiated,
defined and documented. Extensive technical writing and oral presentation skills are
employed. Electrical Engineering 401 is designed to fulfill the requirements for the Writing
Intensive (WI) and the Speaking Intensive (SI) instruction in the Electrical and Computer
Engineering curriculum. Prerequisite: Senior standing in electrical engineering (either
electrical or computer concentration).
Fall semester only, three hours.
ELEE 404. ELECTROMAGNETIC ENERGY TRANSMISSION. The analysis of the
transmission of electromagnetic energy including radiation in free space and in various
media, guided waves in transmission lines, and antennas. Each student completes an antenna
design project as part of this course. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 304. Three hours.
ELEE 431. COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS I. Analysis and design of digital and analog
communication systems. An investigation of the techniques for improving system
performance in transmitting voice, video, and data, over both noisy wired and wireless
channels. A variety of techniques are investigated, including modulation, channel coding,
equalization, and detection. Students are required to simulate the design using MATLAB.
Matlab/Simulink simulations. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 321.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ELEE 432. COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS II. An advanced study of the
communication systems applications. Applications include satellite, cellular, digital
television & radio, fiber-optic, and wired & wireless data networks. System performance
will be investigated using the link budget. Selected topics in leading-edge technologies are
explored such as software-defined radio and software communication architecture.
Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 431.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ELEE 441. COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE. An advanced study of Central Processing
Unit (CPU) organization and architecture. The Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) and
Instruction Level Parallelism (ILP) are emphasized. The organization and importance of the
memory hierarchy, particularly cache memory, are introduced. Modern CPU architectures,

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 181

such as the Intel IA-32 architecture, are used as practical examples of theoretical concepts.
A design project is required. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 204.
Three hours.
ELEE 442. PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE. An advanced study of
multiprocessor architectures. Different approaches to memory, interconnection network and
CPU design are explored. The nature and limitations of massively parallel applications are
explored. Design of large-scale storage systems is introduced. Selected topics in leadingedge computer system design are explored, such as quantum computing or wireless sensor
networks. Students are required to research selected topics in the academic literature.
Corequisite: Electrical Engineering 441.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ELEE 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in electrical
engineering. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
One, two or three hours.
ELEE 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in electrical engineering. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.

Robotics (ROBO)
ROBO 101. INTRO TO ROBOTICS. A hands-on introduction to the science and
engineering involved in mobile robots. Fundamentals of robot hardware and software are
explored and reinforced with weekly hands-on projects culminating in a final project
competition. Prerequisites: Freshman standing; Algebra I course in high school.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ROBO 301. INDUSTRIAL ROBOTICS. Presents the fundamentals of robot mechanisms,
kinematics, dynamics, and controls. Topics include forward and inverse kinematics,
differential motion and velocities, dynamics and force control, path and trajectory planning,
actuators and drive systems, and sensors used in robotic systems. The basics of robotic
control systems are briefly presented. The use of vision systems in robotics is introduced.
Two lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 321 or Mechanical
Engineering 316, robotics minor, or permission of instructor. Fall semester only, three
hours.
ROBO 302. MOBILE ROBOTS. An introduction to the basic principles of mobile robots,
including mechanical, sensory, and cognitive systems necessary for successful operation.
Topics will include hardware, locomotion, sensors, control schemes, localization, and
navigation. Hands-on lab experiences with real robots and a final project supplement lecture
material. Two lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites: Physics 101; Mathematics 261;
and Engineering 274 or Mathematics 214.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ROBO 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT I. An advanced lab course where students
learn techniques and engage in experiments relating to their senior group design project.
Written reports and oral presentations are required. Prerequisite: Senior standing in
engineering or permission of the instructor.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ROBO 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT II. An advanced lab course requiring
student teams to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral presentations
are required. Robotics 452 is designed to fulfill the requirements for the Speaking Intensive
(SI) course in the Electrical and Computer Engineering or Mechanical Engineering major.

182 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering and one of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, or Robotics 451.
Spring semester only, three hours.

English
Dr. Mayo, Chair; Dr. Bilbro, Mrs. Craig, Dr. Harvey, Dr. Loretto, Dr. E. Potter, Ms. Anne
Shepherd, Dr. Rawl, Dr. Waha. Additional Instructional Faculty: Dr. Barbour, Mr. Garvey,
Mrs. Jackson, Mrs. Philson, Mr. Wolfe.
The Department of English sets high standards for its students in the development of
composition and research skills necessary for writing clear, well-supported research papers
in MLA format for each literature course in the program. To this end, all freshman English
majors take English 201: English Literature Survey and Literary Studies I as the
foundational Writing Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL) course in the major. Oral
communication skills are essential to success in graduate school as well as in careers related
to English, and English 351 or 352: Shakespeare serves as the required Speaking Intensive
(SI) course in the department.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in English—39 hours
English Core Requirements (24 hours):
English 201, 202, 203, 204, 302, 485; English 205, 206, or 250; and English 351 or
352.
English Period Electives (6 hours):
Choose six hours from English 304, 306, 308, 312, 314, 318, 320, or 325. Note: only
one of ENGL 320 or 325 can be counted toward these six hours.
English Genre/Tradition Electives (9 hours):
Choose nine hours from English 221, 222, 224, 226, 242, 243, 245, 246, 252, 254,
261, 262, 324, 327, or 356.
Courses that count in the English major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ENGL” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in English and Secondary
Education Certification—85 hours
Core Requirements (30 hours):
English 201, 202, 203, 204, 302, 402, 485; English 205, 206, or 250; English 351 or
352; and Writing 271 or 281.
English Electives (6 hours):
Choose two additional ENGL prefix courses; at least one of which must be 300-level
or higher.
Education Requirements (49 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 316, 326, 330, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102;
Special Education 102, 103; and Communication Arts 104. *Note: Students who
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete
the Education 202 requirement.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for
additional details on teacher certification requirements.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 183

Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in English and Communication
Secondary Education Certification—91 hours
Core Requirements (30 hours):
English 201, 202, 203, 204, 302, 402, 485; English 205, 206, or 250; English 351 or
352; and Writing 271 or 281.
English Electives (6 hours):
Choose two additional ENGL prefix courses; at least one of which must be 300-level
or higher.
Education Requirements (49 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 316, 326, 330, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102;
Special Education 102, 103; and Communication Arts 104. *Note: Students who
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete
the Education 202 requirement.
Communication Core (6 hours):
Choose six (6) hours from any one of the following three areas:
Speech: Communication Arts 109 (one credit course must be taken three times),
303; Theatre 251 or 255.
Media: Communication Arts 135, 215, 222, 235, or 378.
Theatre*: Theatre 251, 259 (one credit course must be taken three times), 261,
262, 320; or English 252.
*Students who elect the “Theatre” option must take English 250 as one of their
English elective courses.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for
additional details on teacher certification requirements.
Note: Advanced Placement credits in English do not count toward the requirements for
majors within the English Department. They will, however, count as general elective credits
toward graduation.
SUPPORTING ACTIVITIES
The Department of English offers students significant co-curricular activities
including:
• A highly acclaimed theatre program, including two main stage productions and
numerous student productions during the academic year.
• Lambda Iota Tau (LIT), the literary honor society on campus, sponsors special
speakers and poetry readings.
• Tau Alpha Pi (TAP), the theatre honorary, sponsors a One-Act Play Festival each
semester.
• Involvement with the campus newspaper (The Collegian), radio station (WSAJ),
literary magazines (The Echo and The Quad), yearbook (The Bridge), or the
College’s public relations offices.
• Internships, whereby students earn academic credit for work done in conjunction
with a professional organization related to English. See the course description for
English 480.

184 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Course Requirements for a minor in Creative Writing (21 hours)
A minor in Creative Writing will consist of Writing 315 or an approved Writing 390
course; Writing 305 or 310; four courses from Writing 271, 272, 281, 320, 359, 382, 383,
or 384; and one genre literature course from English 230, 242, 243, 245, 246, 250, 252, 261,
or 262.
Course Requirements for a minor in English (18 hours)
A minor in English will consist of any six three-credit ENGL literature courses.
Course Requirements for a minor in Musical Theatre (21 hours)
A minor in Musical Theatre will consist of Music 103, 105, 161 or 162 (minimum 3
credits); Music 222, Music or Theatre 210, Theatre 251, and six additional hours choosing
from Music 161, 162, 222, Physical Education 211, 213, 290 Jazz & Tap, Theatre 262, 320,
and 351. Note: All prospective Musical Theatre minors must pass an audition before being
admitted into the Musical Theatre minor program.
Course Requirements for a minor in Theatre (24 hours)
This minor is open to all students with a love for theatre and an interest in
supplementing their academic major with a program that will develop appreciation of
dramatic literature and skills in the various arts and crafts of the theatre. Twenty-four hours
are required, including:
Theatre Core (12 hours):
English 250; Theatre 251, 261, and 259 (taken three times).
Elective options (12 hours) Choose twelve hours from the following:
English 252, 302, 351, or 352; Theatre 255, 262, 320, 351, or 384. English or Theatre
260, 290, 360, 390, 460, or 480 courses may also count as elective options but must
be pre-approved by the department chair and must relate directly to theatre studies.
Course Requirements for a minor in Writing (21 hours)
A minor in Writing will consist of Writing 305* or 310; Writing 315; one 300-level
Writing course (excluding 305 and 310) or a Writing or Communication Arts internship;
and twelve hours choosing from two writing track options:
1.
2.

Professional Writing Track: Four courses from Communication Arts 135, 235,
300, 378, Writing 271 or 281, and Entrepreneurship or Marketing 328.
Technical Writing Track: Three courses from Design 101, 210, and
Communication Arts 378; and one course from Computer Science 141, 155, 205,
and Electrical Engineering 204. *Note: Writing 305 must be completed by
students pursuing the Technical Writing Track.

Course Requirements for a concentration in Business Writing (15 hours)
A concentration in Business Writing will consist of Writing 310, 315, 320;
Entrepreneurship or Marketing 328; and one course to be selected from Accounting 303,
Entrepreneurship or Management 303, Entrepreneurship 467, Marketing 204, 315, and
Management 214.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Creative Writing (15 hours)
A concentration in Creative Writing will consist of Writing 271, 315, 320; and two
courses to be selected from Writing 281, 382, 383, 384, and Communication Arts 359.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 185

Course Requirements for a concentration in Professional Writing (15 hours)
A concentration in Professional Writing will consist of Writing 305 or 310; Writing
315, 320; and one course from Communication Arts 135, 235, 300, and Entrepreneurship
or Marketing 328.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Science Writing and Reporting (16-17
hours)
A concentration in Science Writing and Reporting will consist of Writing 305, 315;
Writing 320 or Communication Arts 135 or 235; and two courses to be selected from
Biology 101, 102, Chemistry 105, 111 and 112, 113, 114, Computer Science 155, Physics
101, 102, 121, 122, and Psychology 204.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Technical Writing (15-16 hours)
A concentration in Technical Writing will consist of Writing 305, 315; Design 101,
210; and one course to be selected from Astronomy 206, 207, Biology 101, Chemistry 105,
Chemistry 111 and 113, Computer Science 141, 155, 205, Electrical Engineering 204,
Physics 101, and 121.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

English (ENGL)
ENGL 201. ENGLISH LITERATURE SURVEY AND LITERARY STUDIES I. The
first semester of the two-semester survey of English literature focuses on the major authors
and representative works of each period from the early Middle Ages (Beowulf) to the 18th
century. It also introduces students to major interpretive/critical schools of thought, as well
as such foundational literary practices as close reading, analysis, and scansion. This course
also fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the
English major. As such, it is the foundational course for the English major and should be
taken in the first semester of the program.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGL 202. ENGLISH LITERATURE SURVEY AND LITERARY STUDIES II.
Elaborating upon the content, practices, and interpretive modes introduced in English 201,
the second semester of the two-semester survey of English literature focuses on the major
authors and representative works of each period from the late 18th century to the modern
era. Prerequisite: English 201.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 203. AMERICAN LITERATURE SURVEY I. The first semester of the twosemester survey of American literature focuses on representative works from the time of the
discovery of America to the Civil War. Attention is concentrated on major writers and their
works in each period with some consideration given to all genres except drama. English
majors are strongly encouraged to take 203 before 204.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGL 204. AMERICAN LITERATURE SURVEY II. The second semester of the twosemester survey of American literature focuses on representative works from post-Civil War
to the late 20th century. Attention is concentrated on major writers and their works in each
period with some consideration given to all genres except drama. Non-English majors may
enroll in 204 without having taken 203, but English majors are strongly encouraged to take
203 before 204.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 205. WORLD LITERATURE SURVEY: ASIA. A survey of representative
authors and works of Asia, with a special focus on the literature of China, India, and Japan.
The 205-206 survey is designed to include works of cultures and regions not covered by the

186 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

English and American literature surveys or the classical and European literature in the
required Humanities 202: Civilization & Literature. Students may take either or both
courses, in either sequence.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGL 206. WORLD LITERATURE SURVEY: AFRICA AND LATIN AMERICA.
A survey of representative authors and literary works of Africa and Latin America,
including the Caribbean. The 205-206 survey is designed to include works of cultures and
regions not covered by the English and American literature surveys or the classical and
European literature in the required Humanities 202: Civilization & Literature. Students may
take either or both courses, in either sequence.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 221. SCIENCE FICTION. This course introduces students to the many ways
science fiction engages a range of cultural and social issues, such as the nature of science
and scientific exploration, science and ethics, scientific dystopia, technological apocalypse,
relationships between faith and science, cybernetics and human identity, transhumanism,
medical ethics, and nanotechnology.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 222. FANTASY LITERATURE. This course is designed to introduce students to the
major features that characterize fantasy as a literary genre. Students will read 16-18 fantasy
novels, including authors such as C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien, Madeleine L’Engle, Ursula
LeGuin, and J. K. Rowling. Class time will be spent analyzing these novels and critiquing them
as works of literature.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 224. ARTHURIAN LITERATURE. This survey course follows King Arthur
across the centuries and literary genres from his seminal appearances in medieval histories
and literature to latter interpretations – Victorian, Modernist, Inkling, and post-modernist in
English and American prose fiction, film, and poetry. Authors include, but are not limited
to, Chretien de Troyes, Thomas Malory, Tennyson, Twain, Eliot, C.S. Lewis, Charles
Williams, the Wizard Tim, and Malamud. Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 226. GOTHIC LITERATURE. This course is a historical survey of Gothic
literature from the eighteenth to the twentieth century, focusing mainly on literary
Gothicism of Europe and America. The course also explores how films and other literary
genres have appropriated Gothic elements in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 242. 19th CENTURY ENGLISH NOVEL. A study of major works by authors
from the great age of the English novel, including Austen, the Brontes, Dickens, Eliot,
Hardy, Conrad, and Wilde. Prerequisite English 202 or by permission.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
ENGL 243. 20th CENTURY ENGLISH NOVEL. A study of the themes and technical
developments which emerge in the novels of such authors as Woolf, Forster, Joyce, Waugh,
Greene, and selected contemporary authors. Prerequisite English 202 or by permission.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 245. 19th CENTURY AMERICAN NOVEL. This course explores the romances
of Hawthorne and Melville; the realism of Mark Twain, Henry James, and Chopin; and the
naturalism of Dreiser, along with works by other key writers. Prerequisite: English 203 and
204 or by permission.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 187

ENGL 246. 20th CENTURY AMERICAN NOVEL. This course gives students
experience with the long fiction of such writers as Cather, Hemingway, Faulkner,
Fitzgerald, Ellison, Morrison, Percy, and others. Prerequisite: English 204 or by permission.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 250. WORLD DRAMA. An introduction to the great playwrights and
representative plays of world drama from the Greeks to the present. Students study elements
of plot, characterization, and idea in each of the plays studied. The course also focuses on
the theatrical and historical context of each play and playwright.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGL 252. MODERN DRAMA. A study of major plays and playwrights of the late
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, including Ibsen, Chekhov, Shaw, O'Neill, Beckett,
Stoppard, and recent American and British playwrights.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 254. PAGE TO STAGE. Students will travel to a major theatre venue such as New
York City (Broadway and Off-Broadway shows); Niagara-on-the-Lake, Canada (Shaw
Festival); Staunton, VA (American Shakespeare Center); Stratford, Canada (Stratford
Festival); or various other global cities that have large theatre centers. Students will read
and be quizzed on selected plays prior to travel. While there, students will attend three to
five plays, attend daily post-play discussion sessions and workshops, and keep a guided
response journal. Upon their return, students will submit a four to five-page paper as their
final exam. Cost of the trip will vary depending on location.
Travel course, offered periodically, one to three hours.
ENGL 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in English.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENGL 261. POETRY. This course explores a wide range of traditional and contemporary
poetry; gives insight into ways poets use imagery, rhyme, meter, persona, and sound
qualities to create meaning in poetry; provides experience with prosody and offers in-depth
experience with the work of selected poets.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGL 262. MODERN POETRY. This course provides a more intensive examination of
the poets and poetry of the 20th century. Students will examine the most significant
movements in poetry of this period, including Modernism in the first half of the century and
post-modern experiments of recent decades.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in English. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENGL 290. STUDIES IN LITERATURE. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow
an in-depth study of authors and works of literature not covered in as much detail in other
courses.
Semester course, three hours.
ENGL 302. CLASSICAL LITERATURE IN TRANSLATION. A study of the major
works of ancient and medieval Greek, Roman, Latin, and Italian literature from Homer to
Dante with particular emphasis on epic and tragedy. The influence of classical literature on
later Western literature will also be considered.
Semester course, three hours.

188 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

ENGL 304. CHAUCER AND THE MIDDLE AGES. An introduction to the literature
and art of the Middle Ages, from Beowulf, through Sir Gawain and the Green Knight and
The Canterbury Tales, to the religious drama of the later Middle Ages. Prerequisite: English
201.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 306. ENGLISH RENAISSANCE: SPENSER TO MILTON. A survey of major
English writers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries from Spenser, Donne, and Jonson
to John Milton. Prerequisite: English 201 or by permission.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 308. RESTORATION AND 18th CENTURY LITERATURE. An introduction
to the works of principle authors from 1660 to 1750 such as Dryden, Pope, Swift, and
Johnson. The simultaneous codification of rules and outbreak of the Romantic temper will
be traced. Prerequisite: English 201.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 312. ROMANTIC LITERATURE. An intensive examination of the poetry of the
six major English Romantic poets of the early nineteenth century: Blake, Wordsworth,
Coleridge, Byron, Shelley, and Keats. Students also read major critical prose by and about
these poets. Prerequisite: English 202 or by permission.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 314. VICTORIAN LITERATURE. A study of the major British writers of the
period from 1837 to 1900, focusing particularly on Tennyson, Robert Browning, Christina
Rossetti, Gerard Manley Hopkins, and Oscar Wilde. Prerequisite: English 202.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 318. AMERICAN RENAISSANCE. An opportunity for students to explore an
unusually productive phase in the history of ideas in America through literature of
outstanding quality including works of Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne, Melville, and
Whitman. The dynamics of interaction among members of that group will be studied.
Prerequisite: English 203 or by permission. Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 320. SOUTHERN LITERATURE. With significant emphasis on the works of
William Faulkner, this course explores the great flowering of literature in the American
South in the twentieth century. Such writers as Robert Penn Warren, Richard Wright,
Eudora Welty, Flannery O’Connor, and Walker Percy are also considered, especially as they
seek to move beyond the “aesthetic of memory” that characterizes Faulkner’s novels.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 324. EUROPEAN LITERATURE. A study of European fiction in translation, with
major emphasis on the novel, highlighting the work of writers such as Flaubert, Tolstoy,
Dostoevsky, and Mann.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 325. CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE. A study of American, European and
world literature of the last three decades, with particular emphasis on Nobel and other
award-winning authors.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 327. CHRISTIAN WRITERS. This course acquaints students with a wide variety
of writers from the early twentieth century to the present whose works express and engage
Christianity in significant ways. It examines the question of how Christians faithfully
practice the discipline of reading and writing and offers students opportunities to develop
their own creative and devotional practices. Operating on the premise that there is a place

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 189

for many kinds of literary genius in the kingdom of God, this course challenges students
intellectually and encourages them spiritually.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
ENGL 351. SHAKESPEARE I. One of two courses which together examine 20 of the 37
plays of William Shakespeare. Each semester begins with a study of the sonnets and then
focuses on ten of the major plays, selected from the comedies, histories, tragedies and
romances. Class discussion is supplemented with a required lab session for the viewing and
discussion of performances of the plays under study. Either Shakespeare course will satisfy
the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the English major. Plays for the fall semester
usually include Richard III, Taming of the Shrew, Merchant of Venice, A Midsummer
Night's Dream, Romeo and Juliet, Much Ado About Nothing, Henry V, Julius Caesar,
Othello, and The Winter's Tale. Students may take either or both courses, in either sequence.
Prerequisite: English 202 or by permission.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGL 352. SHAKESPEARE II. One of two courses which together examine 20 of the 37
plays of William Shakespeare. Each semester begins with a study of the sonnets and then
focuses on ten of the major plays, selected from the comedies, histories, tragedies and
romances. Class discussion is supplemented with a required lab session for the viewing and
discussion of performances of the plays under study. Either Shakespeare course will satisfy
the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the English major. Plays for the spring
semester usually include: As You Like It, Twelfth Night, Richard II, 1 Henry IV, Measure
for Measure, Hamlet, Macbeth, King Lear, Cymbeline, and The Tempest. Students may take
either or both courses, in either sequence. Prerequisite: English 202 or by permission.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 356. LITERARY THEORY. A detailed examination of the major literary critics
and theorists of Western civilization. Part one is devoted to key figures of the Classical
tradition; Part two uses basic tenets of that tradition to engage and critique the "new wave"
of 20th and 21st century critical theory. The class employs a seminar format; students lead
discussion on a rotating basis and are expected to contribute significantly to every
discussion. This course is strongly recommended for all students considering graduate study
in English. Prerequisites: English 201, 202, 203, and 204, junior or senior English major; or
by permission.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGL 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive
background in literature to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics.
Junior standing in the English Department, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required. Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the proposed
study.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENGL 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in English. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENGL 390. STUDIES IN LITERATURE. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow
an in-depth study of authors and works of literature not covered in as much detail in other
courses.
Semester course, three hours.
ENGL 402. GRAMMAR AND HISTORY OF ENGLISH. Required of English majors
seeking secondary certification in English, this course offers an introduction to the history
of the English language, a review of traditional grammar, and presentation of a working
knowledge of modern grammar.
Semester course, three hours.

190 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

ENGL 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive
background in literature to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics.
Senior standing in the English Department, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required. Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the proposed
study.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENGL 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in English. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENGL 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENGLISH. Students majoring in English may, with prior
consent of the department, earn academic credit for work done (normally off campus) under
the direct supervision of a professional in an English-related field. This includes but is not
limited to such fields as publishing, library science, journalism, technical writing, and script
writing. Students must keep a daily log of activities and submit an academic paper
summarizing the experience. A maximum of six credits of internship may apply toward
graduation.
Semester course, one to six hours.
ENGL 485. SENIOR CAPSTONE. As a culminating experience for senior English
majors, this seminar-style course provides students an opportunity to reflect on their college
literary studies; to deepen their understanding of literature, its role in the pursuit of truth,
and its place in their lives, especially as Christians; and to apply what they have learned as
majors in completing a substantial project. This project will focus on a significant work,
author, or literary topic and should reflect thorough research, thoughtful analysis, and clear
communication. The course subject matter varies each semester to reflect the interests and
expertise of the professor. Prerequisite: Senior status in the English program.
Semester course, three hours.
ENGL 499. HONORS IN ENGLISH. Seniors who have shown special aptitude in
literature may, with consent of the department, undertake this course on an individual basis.
The format is similar to that of the independent study, but students must also submit their
papers to the entire English faculty and provide an oral presentation and defense of their
research.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Theatre (THEA)
THEA 209. BALLROOM DANCING. This course explores the history, rhythm, steps and
styles of the Foxtrot, Waltz, Tango, Cha-Cha, Rumba and Swing. Students will learn the
basic skills and information necessary to develop and continue one’s interest in ballroom
dancing, in addition to learning the fundamentals of lead/follow technique, dance etiquette,
cooperation with a partner, and the ability to identify and distinguish music for each dance.
Fall semester only, one hour.
THEA 210. INTRODUCTION TO MUSICAL THEATRE. This class is a survey of the
development of musical theatre as a performing art form in America from 1750 to the
present. By looking at musical theatre from multiple perspectives - historical, cultural,
political, social, aesthetic - the class will explore the ways in which musicals both reflect
and embody values and trends of the cultural landscape in which they were written. Included
will be practical study of the format of the libretto and musical score in relationship to the
major musical theatre genre. Students may only receive credit for one of Theatre 210 or
Music 210.
Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 191

THEA 211. BEGINNING DANCE. This course explores various movement disciplines
including elements of Ballet, Jazz, Modern Dance, Folk Dance, Musical Theater, Lyrical
and Hip Hop while investigating the history and cultural value of dance. No prior dance
experience is necessary.
Fall semester only, one hour.
THEA 213. INTERMEDIATE DANCE. This course explores various movement
disciplines including elements of Ballet, Jazz, Modern Dance, Musical Theater, Lyrical and
Hip Hop while investigating the history and cultural value of dance. This course is more
appropriate for the student with previous dance experience. Fall semester only, one hour.
THEA 215. ADVANCED DANCE. This advanced course explores various movement
disciplines including elements of Jazz, Modern, Contemporary, Musical Theater, Lyrical
and Choreography while investigating the history and cultural value of dance. This course
is more appropriate for the student with previous dance experience. Prerequisite: Theatre
213.
Spring semester only, one hour.
THEA 216. ADVANCED BALLROOM DANCING. This advanced level course
continues the exploration of the rhythm, steps and styles of the Foxtrot, Waltz, Tango, ChaCha, Rumba and Swing. Students will learn more advanced patterns and skills in these
dances, in addition to learning the Viennese Waltz and advanced partnering in the Swing.
Prerequisite: Theatre 209.
Spring semester only, one hour.
THEA 251. ACTING. Practice in preparing a dramatic role for performance. Exercises will
focus on freeing the actor’s voice and body for maximum expressiveness. Students will
prepare and perform monologues, short scenes, and a single extended scene.
Fall semester only, three hours.
THEA 255. ORAL INTERPRETATION OF LITERATURE. Study and practice of the
techniques of reading literature aloud to enhance audience appreciation and enjoyment. Oral
readings are given in the areas of fiction, poetry, and drama. Each student also prepares and
performs a final ten-minute recital.
Fall semester only, three hours.
THEA 259. THEATRE PRACTICUM. Students may receive one credit for a minimum
of 40 hours of supervised technical theatre work directly related to a main-stage theatre
production. Students must keep an ongoing record of the dates and times of their work, and
the student’s supervisor must sign each entry. These records are due by Study Day of the
semester enrolled. This course is repeatable, but no more than three hours may count toward
the Theatre minor. It will count as a general elective if taken more than three times.
Semester course, one hour.
THEA 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive
background in theatre to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics.
Sophomore standing with declared Theatre minor, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required. Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the
proposed study.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
THEA 261. STAGECRAFT. This course covers the technical work of set-design, lighting,
sound design, and stage rigging as well as administrative/budgetary management of
technical theater. A practical course taught both in the classroom and in hands-on settings.
Students will be required to assist in various productions and live performances throughout
the semester. Note: for safety reasons, no minors may enroll in this course, and students
should be aware that some lifting and handling of power tools is required.
Semester course, three hours.

192 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

THEA 262. DESIGN FOR THE THEATRE. Focuses on the visual aspects of theatrical
production, including set design, costume design, and lighting design. Through group and
individual projects, students will work through the design process: analyzing the text, doing
research, formulating a production concept, and applying the elements of design to create a
visual world for the actors to inhabit. They will also practice the skills necessary to
communicate their ideas to both a director and technical crews: drawing, drafting, model
building, and organizational paperwork.
Semester course, three hours.
THEA 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in theatre. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
THEA 290. STUDIES IN THEATRE. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an
in-depth study of aspects of theatre not covered in as much detail in other courses.
Semester course, three hours.
THEA 320. STAGE DIRECTION. Theories and techniques of directing plays for the
stage. Principles of play analysis, blocking, characterization, and rhythm are studied. The
student will direct laboratory scenes, prepare production scripts, do script analyzes, and
produce an extended scene. Prerequisite: Theatre 251.
Fall semester only, three hours.
THEA 351. ADVANCED ACTING. Study and practice of advanced techniques of acting.
Students will also focus on vocal production, movement, and elements of style related to
the performance of plays from various periods of theatre history. Prerequisite: Theatre 251.
Semester course, three hours.
THEA 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive
background in theatre to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics.
Junior standing with declared Theatre minor, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required. Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the
proposed study.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
THEA 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in theatre. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
THEA 384. PLAYWRITING. This course emphasizes the various aspects of writing an
effective play. Topics include the processes of drafting and revision, analyses of literary
style and technique, and methods of offering and accepting constructive criticism.
Additionally, the collaborative nature of playwriting will be addressed; a play is not
complete until the writer has involved others in the creative process. The student is expected
to submit original manuscripts during the semester. Students may only receive credit for
one of Theatre 384 or Writing 384.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
THEA 390. STUDIES IN THEATRE. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an
in-depth study of aspects of theatre not covered in as much detail in other courses.
Semester course, three hours.
THEA 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for students with extensive
background in theatre to do intensive independent study or research on specialized topics.
Senior standing with declared Theatre minor, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required. Application deadline: end of the semester preceding the
proposed study.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 193

THEA 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in theatre. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
THEA 480. INTERNSHIP IN THEATRE. Students pursuing a minor in Theatre may,
with prior consent of the Department, earn academic credit for work done (normally off
campus) under the direct supervision of a professional in a theatre-related field. Students
must keep a daily log of activities and submit an academic paper summarizing the
experience. A maximum of six credits of internship may apply toward graduation.
Semester course, one to six hours.

Writing (WRIT)
WRIT 101. FOUNDATIONS OF ACADEMIC DISCOURSE. A course introducing
students to the fundamentals of college composition. Topics include the writing process,
rhetorical strategies, basics of critical reading and thinking, and key forms of writing such
as informative, evaluative, argumentative, and synthesis. This course serves as a foundation
to prepare students to succeed in other academic writing contexts. This course contains the
Information Literacy (IL) requirement.
Semester course, three hours.
WRIT 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in
writing. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
WRIT 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in writing. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
WRIT 271. CREATIVE WRITING. An exploration of the elements and techniques of
writing short fiction and poetry. Informal lectures and discussions focus on student writing.
Semester course, three hours.
WRIT 272. DEVELOPING CHARACTERS. A creative writing course that will allow
students to develop character backstory and explore the impact of character psychology on
action and in dialogue. Concepts will enhance character development for film scripts, short
stories, novels, and more.
Semester course, three hours.
WRIT 281. CREATIVE NON-FICTION. An exploration of the elements and techniques
of writing creative nonfiction, including such forms as personal essays, memoirs, travel
writing, biography, literary journalism, book reviews, and lyric essays. Informal lectures
and discussions focus on student writing.
Semester course, three hours.
WRIT 290. STUDIES IN WRITING. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an indepth study of writing concepts, issues, and practices not covered in as much detail in other
courses.
Semester course, three hours.
WRIT 305. TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION. This course explores elements of clear
and effective writing and oral expression appropriate for careers in the technical professions.
Coursework will include case studies, job search materials, set of instructions, standard
professional correspondence, examination of social media in professional settings, oral
presentation with presentation software, and research into a technical field with the goal of
communicating that field to non-experts. Prerequisite: Writing 101.
Semester course, three hours.

194 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

WRIT 310. BUSINESS COMMUNICATION. This course explores elements of clear and
effective writing and oral expression for business-related professions. Coursework includes
business communication case studies, job search materials, business correspondence (email, memos, and letters), business proposals, business plans, oral presentations, social
media in the business world, and formal business reports. Prerequisite: Writing 101.
Semester course, three hours.
WRIT 315. TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL DOCUMENT DESIGN. This
course explores principles, techniques, and procedures of electronic and print-based
document production. Topics include the relationship between written and visual material;
traditional copy preparation and design; desktop publishing; traditional printing techniques
for books, brochures, pamphlets, and newsletters; and an introduction to electronic
document design and production. Students will study key layout and design concepts and
analyze examples. Student will produce their own documents, including newsletters, small
and large advertisements, brochures, flyers, online journal or newspaper blog space, and a
website entry page. Prerequisite: Writing 101.
Semester course, three hours.
WRIT 320. PROFESSIONAL EDITING. This course provides an overview of key
concepts and skills essential for the professional editor. It will cover standard proofreading
marks, the creation and use of style guides, communication with authors and publishers,
best practices in freelance editing, and feedback tools in Microsoft Word and Adobe
Acrobat. Students will gain competency in editing both fiction and non-fiction prose as
proofreaders, copyeditors, content editors, and developmental editors. Prerequisite: Writing
101.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
WRIT 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in
writing. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
WRIT 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in writing. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
WRIT 382. POETRY WRITING. This course explores various forms and elements of
lyric poetry and gives students the opportunity to develop their craftsmanship and poetic
vision. In addition to producing their own poetry, students will analyze poems by published
writers and fellow students, explore the literary marketplace, and read essays on poetics and
on the role of the Christian artist. Prerequisite: Writing 101.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
WRIT 383. STORY WRITING. This course explores various forms and elements of the
short story and gives students the opportunity to develop their craftsmanship and narrative
vision. In addition to producing their own stories, students will analyze stories by published
writers and fellow students and read essays on fiction writing and on the role of the Christian
artist. Prerequisite: Writing 101.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
WRIT 384. PLAYWRITING. This course emphasizes the various aspects of writing an
effective play. Topics include the processes of drafting and revision, analyses of literary
style and technique, and methods of offering and accepting constructive criticism.
Additionally, the collaborative nature of playwriting will be addressed; a play is not
complete until the writer has involved others in the creative process. The student is expected

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 195

to submit original manuscripts during the semester. Students may only receive credit for
one of Theatre 384 or Writing 384.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
WRIT 390. STUDIES IN WRITING. Subject matter varies each semester, to allow an indepth study of writing concepts, issues, and practices not covered in as much detail in other
courses.
Semester course, three hours.
WRIT 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in
writing. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
WRIT 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in writing. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
WRIT 480. INTERNSHIP IN WRITING. This course offers practical experience in the
field of writing. Prerequisite: Sophomore status or higher and permission of the department
internship coordinator.
Semester course, one to six hours.

Entrepreneurship
Mr. Sweet, Chair; Ms. English, Mr. K. Smith. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr. English,
Mr. Lewis.
The mission of the Business Program at Grove City College is to prepare our students to
become effective and ethical leaders in business as well as in society as a whole. This
mission incorporates the following learning outcomes:
1. General Business Knowledge and Analytical Skills - Our students will
demonstrate the entry-level knowledge, analytical skills, and information literacy
generally necessary in business.
2. Communication Skills - Our students will demonstrate the written and verbal
skills needed to communicate effectively within the business environment.
3. Ethics - Our students will demonstrate a Christian understanding of business
which reflects their moral and ethical responsibilities to all potential
stakeholders.
4. Global Perspective - Our students will demonstrate an understanding of the
global and multi-cultural issues in the current business environment.
5. Entrepreneurship Knowledge and Skills - Our students will demonstrate entrylevel knowledge and skills necessary to successfully plan, launch, and operate
startup commercial and social enterprises, and to develop new business models
in corporate contexts. Students will acquire experience and competencies in
ideation, lean startup methodologies, competitive research, blended-value
business modeling, digital technologies, business planning, and in the financial,
legal, ethical and faith-minded dimensions of entrepreneurship.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Entrepreneurship—67
hours
Entrepreneurial Core (34 hours):
Entrepreneurship 101,102, 201, 302, 303, 306, 307, 309, 312, 430, 466, and 467.
Business Core (15 hours):
Accounting 201 and 202; Finance 301; Marketing 104; and Statistics 131.

196 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Entrepreneurial Electives (12 hours):
Complete 12 hours choosing from Entrepreneurship 104, 314, 317, 319, 324, 326,
328, 330, 331, 390, 402, 408, 409, 423, 424, 426, 468, 480, 488, or any two courses
from any 300- or 400-level Accounting, Entrepreneurship, Finance, International
Business, Management, or Marketing offerings not listed. A maximum of three
credits of Entrepreneurship 480 Internship may also count as entrepreneurial
electives; any remaining internship credits will count as general electives.
Major-Related Courses (6-7 hours):
Economics 101; and one of Computer Science 141, Mathematics 141, or
Mathematics 161.
Courses that count in the Entrepreneurship major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE 105), “INBS”,
“MARK”, “MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106) prefix, and STAT 131. A minimum MQPA of
2.00 is required to graduate.
It is essential for students pursuing the Entrepreneurship major to possess strong
writing, speaking, and information literacy skills in preparation for future careers in
business. Four required courses for the major will equip students with these skills:
Entrepreneurship 466 Business Planning is designated to enhance Writing Intensive (WI)
skills; Entrepreneurship 102 Technology for the Entrepreneur for Information Literacy (IL)
skills; and Entrepreneurship 101 The Entrepreneurial Mind: Creativity and Innovation and
Entrepreneurship 467 Corporate Innovation for Speaking Intensive (SI) skills.
Course Requirements for a minor in Entrepreneurship (22 hours)
(Restricted to non-Entrepreneurship majors only)
A minor in Entrepreneurship will consist of Accounting 201; Entrepreneurship 101,
102, 201; Finance 301; and nine hours from Entrepreneurship 302, 303, 307, 309 or 328,
312, 314, 317, 408, 423, 430, or 467.
Course Requirements for a minor in Digital Entrepreneurship (21 hours)
(Restricted to non-Entrepreneurship majors only)
A minor in Digital Entrepreneurship will consist of Entrepreneurship 101, 328, 330,
409; Design 101, 210: and one of Entrepreneurship 309 or Marketing 315.
Course Requirements for a minor in Redemptive Entrepreneurship (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-Biblical & Religious Studies, non-Christian Ministries, and nonEntrepreneurship majors only)
A minor in Redemptive Entrepreneurship will consist of Entrepreneurship 101, 307,
and 314; one course from Entrepreneurship 319, 408, or 468 ; and two courses from Religion
220, 248, 255, 320, Christian Ministries 228, and 248.
Course Requirements for a minor in Missional Entrepreneurship (18 hours)
(Restricted to Biblical & Religious Studies and Christian Ministries majors only)
A minor in Missional Entrepreneurship will consist of including Entrepreneurship 101,
201, 307, 314, 408; and one course from Entrepreneurship 319 or 468.
Course Requirements for a minor in Social Enterprise (21 hours)
(Restricted to Business Program majors only)
A minor in Social Enterprise will consist of Entrepreneurship 307; Entrepreneurship
408 or International Business 408; Sociology 201, 356; Communication Arts 225 or Global

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 197

Studies 300; and six hours from Sociology 208, 314; Social Work 101, 305, 382; or
Entrepreneurship, Management, or Sociology 390 with department chair approval.
Course Requirements for a minor in Social Entrepreneurship (21 hours)
(Restricted to Sociology majors only)
A minor in Social Entrepreneurship will consist of Entrepreneurship 101, 307;
Entrepreneurship 408 or International Business 408; Accounting 201; Finance 301;
Management 103; and Marketing 104.
Course Requirements for a minor in Social Innovation (21 hours)
(Restricted to Entrepreneurship majors only)
A minor in Social Innovation will consist of Entrepreneurship 408 or International
Business 408; Sociology 201, 356; Communication Arts 225 or Global Studies 300; and
nine hours from Sociology 208, 314; Social Work 101, 305, 382; and Entrepreneurship,
Management, or Sociology 390 with department chair approval.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Entrepreneurship (ENTR)
ENTR 101. ENTREPRENEURIAL MIND: CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION. This
course introduces the student to entrepreneurial thought and the process for innovation and
idea generation. Students begin to develop their own entrepreneurial mindset and the
business skills essential to the entrepreneurial experience. Students are introduced to the
basics of business and challenged to think creatively about forming businesses or designing
products to solve customer problems and address unmet needs in the commercial and social
arenas. Through experiential learning, case studies, business writing assignments, and
creative thinking exercises, students will develop a disciplined thought process for starting
and running their own enterprise. This course satisfies the Speaking-Intensive requirement
for Entrepreneurship majors. Corequisite: Entrepreneurship 102 for Entrepreneurship
majors. All other majors may take the course as an elective without the corequisite.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 102. TECHNOLOGY FOR THE ENTREPRENEUR. Students learn to use
technology commonly used by entrepreneurs in the following areas: presentations,
networking, blogging, social media, design, basic websites, eCommerce, and prototyping.
This course satisfies the Information Literacy requirement for Entrepreneurship majors.
Entrepreneurship majors take this concurrently with Entrepreneurship 101.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ENTR 104. LIFE DESIGN STUDIO. Students often struggle with knowing how to define
their future. Whether one is trying to choose a major or to figure out how to go about
pursuing a career using that chosen major, it’s a process that’s often filled with uncertainty
and angst. By approaching these challenges as a designer would approach creating a
product, students will use proven design methods to understand who they are, what they
want to do, and how they can build a life full of joy. During this class, students will explore
how to apply design thinking principles to their lives while learning more about themselves
and how to connect their work to God’s work.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 201. LEAN LAUNCHPAD. The Lean LaunchPad uses the Customer Discovery
process and the Business Model Canvas to collapse the infinite possibilities of a startup into
a set of solvable problems. Students will be taught how to use the information that they

198 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

collect from customers to validate and/or invalidate their business model hypotheses.
Throughout the course, the teams will modify their business models as they iterate, pivot,
and/or restart their ideas. It provides real world, hands-on learning on what it’s like to
actually start a company. This class is not about how to write a business plan. It is a practical
entrepreneurial lab in which the goal is to create an entrepreneurial experience that includes
the pressures and demands of the real world in an early-stage startup within the constraints
of the classroom and with a limited amount of time. Students will work in teams, learning
how to use a business model to brainstorm and test each critical element of a company.
Students will also learn how to develop customers in real business scenarios, testing product
viability and authentic demand.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
entrepreneurship. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENTR 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in entrepreneurship. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENTR 302. SALES IN THE STARTUP. The purpose of this course is to understand the
theory and practice of sales as it is approached in the environment of a startup business. The
class will explore strategic selling methodologies, such as partnership development, channel
development, and seminar-based sales, as well as specific sales skills and techniques.
Students will learn about the particular challenges of selling in the context of a newly
launched business, and they will have the opportunity to meet and interact with sales
professionals who have specialized in this sales context. Throughout the course, students
will have opportunities to practice sales skills.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 303. LAW FOR ENTREPRENEURS. This course provides an awareness and
basic understanding of the legal issues frequently encountered by entrepreneurs. The course
specifically examines the legal issues surrounding the organization, financing, and
operations of a company, including ownership structuring, the raising of capital, federal
securities requirements and exemptions, determining valuation, intellectual property, board
formation, human resources, and exit strategies. Students may not receive credit for both
Entrepreneurship 303 and Management 303.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 306. ETHICS FOR THE ENTREPRENEUR. Students study the ethical decisions
business professionals face in small business, family business, and corporate business
settings. Students analyze selected case studies and discuss their analysis with the class.
Students will interact with business professionals as they study and analyze “living” cases
in which one or more of the parties interacts with the class. Through these discussions,
students will come to understand what constitutes an ethical issue and the different
philosophical, theological, and practical perspectives from which individuals may approach
an ethical decision. Students are challenged to begin thinking through and developing their
own ethical framework as well as to realize the implications of Christian faith in making
ethical business decisions.
Fall semester only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 199

ENTR 307. SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP. How might one “do good while doing
well?” Social entrepreneurship is an accelerating field of study and practice in today’s world
of shrinking governmental services. Students study highly effective non-profit as well as
for-profit social enterprises to learn the unique aspects of entrepreneurship used to facilitate
meaningful social change. Practitioners of existing successful social enterprises act as guest
lecturers and coaches.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 309. E-COMMERCE. This course will provide a foundation for understanding the
essential components of a successful eCommerce system, including eCommerce strategy,
target market analysis, search engine optimization, integrated marketing, web usability,
payment processing, current technologies, data management and fulfillment systems. Case
studies and actual business scenarios will be examined in detail, and students will have the
opportunity to explore practical applications in the marketplace by working in teams to
design and operate their own eCommerce ventures during the semester.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 312. ENTREPRENEURSHIP: MANAGING A GROWING ENTERPRISE.
This course focuses on the strategy and operations issues involved with managing an
existing company beyond the startup phase using a global business simulation game. While
the course is open to non-entrepreneurship, business, and accounting majors, it presupposes
a basic understanding of business functions and language. The core feature of the course is
a simulation tied to students’ weekly business decisions involving recognizing
opportunities, assessing risk, developing resources, and implementing a course of action.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 314. ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH. This
course explores the relationship between entrepreneurial theory and practice and the
execution of church ministry and mission work, with a particular focus on the ways in which
entrepreneurship can be employed in the service of Kingdom of God. In addition, the
development of “kingdom-minded” businesses providing blended value will be explored in
detail. Students will learn about need identification, opportunity analysis, ministry model
development, strategic planning, and reputation building in the context of faith-based
organizational experience. Concepts related to organizational launch, growth, development
and sustainability will also be addressed throughout the course. Students will apply
diagnostic and problem-solving skills to case studies, while identifying entrepreneurial
strategies to address challenges and opportunities. Students will work throughout the
semester in project teams with a local church ministry or mission endeavor.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 317. STARTUP FOUNDERS’ DILEMMAS. The early decisions made by the
founders of startup organizations can determine the entire future path of a company. In this
course, students will explore the types of decisions that founders face and the potential
impact of such decisions. They will examine case studies of actual startup companies in
detail in order to understand how to avoid common pitfalls and mistakes. Through the
examination of the results of a decade of research, including quantitative data on almost ten
thousand founders, students will build a strong understanding of these types of decisions
and how their consequences can make or break organizations. The specific areas of study
will include pre-founding decisions, founding team dilemmas, hires, and investors.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 319. ENTREPRENEURIAL LEADERSHIP. This course will include a
comprehensive survey of research around the dimensions of successful entrepreneurial

200 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

leadership and the development of an entrepreneurial leadership assessment tool. Students
will have opportunities to hear from, engage with, and assess several successful
entrepreneurs, further developing their understanding of the dimensions of entrepreneurial
leadership. Students will complete a comprehensive assessment of their own strengths and
weaknesses relative to these dimensions using a variety of assessment tools and will prepare
and present a personal entrepreneurial leadership development plan with specific strategies
to leverage strengths and accommodate for shortcomings. Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 324. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE MUSIC BUSINESS. This course is designed
to analyze the most important legal issues in the contemporary music industry, including
how these issues began, how they have evolved, and where they are headed. Students will
explore copyright law, including fair use and public domain, and how it affects sampling,
interpolation, and mashups. The course will explore contracts related to songwriting, 360°
deals, revenue sharing, and more, in addition to legal documents related to bands, booking,
and touring. Students will also explore contemporary and new means of creating and
disseminating music, including streaming audio/video and augmented/virtual reality, and
explore associated legal implications. Students may only receive credit for one of
Entrepreneurship 324, Management 324, or Music 324. Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 326. INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS OF MUSIC. This course is
designed as an introduction to the business of music, providing students with the latest
instruction on best practices for music creators, consumers, and facilitators working in this
field. Students will have the opportunity to learn the fundamental principles involved in the
entrepreneurial and legal dimensions of the music business, exploring the structural and
functional components of this ever-changing and rapidly growing industry. Particular
attention will be given to the challenges of starting, growing and managing a music business
in the digital era. Students may only receive credit for one of Students may only receive
credit for one of Entrepreneurship 326, Management 326, or Music 326.
Semester course, three hours.
ENTR 328. CONTENT MARKETING. Students will probe the subject of content
marketing as a core discipline for 21st century entrepreneurs. They will learn essential
concepts for strategic content development and web-based thought leadership and will
acquire skills for use with practical web applications. Students will engage in a semesterlong project using WordPress to publish Internet content for their own website idea, or for
a company or organization, employing techniques learned in a class. The structure of the
class will include two teaching sessions per week and a WordPress lab. Students may not
receive credit for both Entrepreneurship 328 and Marketing 328.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 330. SEARCH ENGINE OPTIMIZATION. Students will explore the
fundamental principles and best practices in the field of search engine optimization. They
will learn and develop the essential knowledge and skills required to achieve favorable
organic rank in the most important search engines and will become familiar with and interact
with experts in the industry. Case studies and actual business scenarios will be examined in
detail. Students will have opportunity to conduct SEO research for small businesses and
non-profit organizations in a semester-long project. Students may not receive credit for both
Entrepreneurship 330 and Marketing 330.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 331. ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND ENTERPRISE. An examination of
entrepreneurship and its role in society. The contribution of creativity, foresight, and other

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 201

attributes of entrepreneurs to the working of both for-profit and not-for profit enterprises
will be explored.
Semester course, three hours.
ENTR 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
entrepreneurship. Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENTR 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in entrepreneurship. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENTR 390. STUDIES IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP. Studies in areas of entrepreneurship
not fully covered by regular departmental offerings.
Semester course, three hours.
ENTR 402. TECH COMMERCIALIZATION STUDIO. In this course, students will
examine what is needed to take an idea to market while exploring business and revenue
models, legal considerations, customer validation, and go-to-market strategies through
lectures, guest presentations, and working on exercises exploring the commercialization of
a specific technology.
Spring semester only, 1 hour.
ENTR 408. SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP PRACTICUM. Using case studies,
lectures, and hands-on exercises, this course clarifies and illustrates the steps necessary to
prepare to launch a social enterprise. Topics include the idea generation, business models,
organizational structure, staffing, governance, funding, and measurement of social impact.
Over the course of the semester, students will prepare business plans for their own social
enterprises. Students may only receive credit for one of International Business 408 or
Entrepreneurship 408.
Spring semester course, three hours.
ENTR 409. DIGITAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP. This course will explore the
foundational principles and essential components for launching a successful entrepreneurial
endeavor on the Internet. The course will cover important topics related to Internet
Entrepreneurship, including key entrepreneurial models, business concept development,
opportunity analysis, advanced search marketing techniques, understanding user behavior,
and creating a viable Internet model for business endeavors. Case studies and existing
businesses will be examined in detail. Students will have the opportunity to study the
journeys of successful Internet Entrepreneurs, to hear from experts in the field, and to create
an original Internet business model in a team with other students.
Spring semester course, three hours.
ENTR 420. MENTORING. This course will help students learn and practice the skills
necessary to establish and leverage valuable mentor relationships. The course consists of
two dimensions: classroom study and one-on-one discussions with an experienced business
leader. Students learn how to identify, establish and work with a mentor, to develop
professional networks, to build relationships, and to determine the purpose and value of
relationships in the world of the entrepreneur. Students will be prepared for typical
mentorship discussion topics, such as a personal value statement, strengths assessment, a
personal development plan, ethical leadership, professionalism, meaningful
internships/summer jobs and finding one’s calling. The course, designed for junior and
senior Entrepreneurship majors, is open to any upper-division non-majors pending space
available. Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.
Semester course, three hours.
ENTR 423. FAMILY, FRANCHISE, AND SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT. An
upper-level course that will focus on the dynamics of owning and operating family-owned

202 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

businesses, franchise businesses and acquired small businesses. Appropriate for students
anticipating working in a family business, students who are considering acquiring and
operating a franchise business or students considering acquiring and operating an existing
small business. Students explore the key management issues facing these types of business
today including interpersonal relations, succession/transition, business functions of
marketing, sales, financial management, etc., in the special context of the unique challenges
and opportunities of the family-owned, franchise and small business. Students will hear
from and interact with family, franchise and small business owners who have agreed to visit
classes and share their experiences.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 424. SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT. This course will focus on providing an
introduction to supply chain management. It will deal with both the logistical activities of
demand fulfillment and the behavioral aspects of supply chain management. Experiential
learning will take place within a simulation called, “Fundamentals of Supply Chain
Management.” This course will provide considerable insight into the management of supply
chains. Students will develop disciplines and a knowledge of best practices that will
facilitate their success in a world where demand and supply integration is one of the
cornerstones of modern business. Students may not receive credit for both Management 424
and Entrepreneurship 424.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 426. MUSIC MARKETING. This course will provide students with an overview
of key music marketing principles, terms, and practices, which together form the foundation
for all music marketing plans. Students will dig into the key areas of opportunities for
musicians, including publicity, advertising, promotion (online and traditional), digital
distribution, touring, licensing/synch, and radio. Students will learn what companies and
partners to work with to reach their core fans, how to communicate with them, and the ways
to leverage the changes and new opportunities that the internet offers to marketers. In
addition, they will learn marketing ideas to help them describe their vision, identify a market
need, analyze an artist’s fan base, learn from their competitors, set marketing plan goals,
and find the perfect mix of new marketing strategies ranging from branding, product, price,
place, promotion, and marketing information systems. Students may only receive credit for
one of Entrepreneurship 426, Marketing 426, or Music 426. Prerequisite: Marketing 204.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 430. ENTREPRENEURIAL FINANCE AND VENTURE CAPITAL. This
course covers financial skills used by entrepreneurs and venture capitalists from the startup
of a venture through its harvest. This includes a wide variety of topics including the financial
elements of a business plan, the evaluation of new business opportunities, financial
planning, sources of financing at different stages, valuation methods, essentials of security
law, and methods of harvesting an investment. Prerequisite: Finance 301.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
entrepreneurship. Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENTR 466. BUSINESS PLANNING. This course provides students from all majors with
a vehicle for turning their business and non-profit ideas into concrete viable business plans.
Either as individuals or as teams, students research, create, and present a plan for a viable
business or non-profit organization. They are coached by the instructor and may also be
matched to an appropriate mentor with experience in their area of interest. Successful
completion of this course requires students to participate in the campus-wide business plan

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 203

competition held during the spring semester. This course satisfies the Writing Intensive
requirement for the Entrepreneurship major. Prerequisite: Entrepreneurship 430 and a
business or non-profit idea.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 467. CORPORATE INNOVATION. In this course, students have a unique
opportunity to explore real-world innovation concepts in the context of working directly
with a corporation. Corporate representatives work directly with Grove City College
students each semester, providing students with business and technology concepts that
engage them in terms of research, strategy, innovation and business case development.
Students from a variety of disciplines collaborate in groups to explore, define, strategize,
and develop the concept. The course utilizes a service-learning model, and benefits from
the constant support of representatives of the partner company, who regularly attend classes
for input and feedback. At the end of the semester, students present their findings and
recommendations to corporate executives.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENTR 468. INNOVATION FOR IMPACT. Innovation and creativity are widely
recognized as drivers of success in today’s world for both individuals and organizations.
Whether entities are nonprofits, startups, small companies, large companies, or
governmental units, they are all looking to employ people who understand innovation. This
course will provide students with an understanding of how different entities can innovate
using design thinking methodology. As we explore how to innovate in concept, we will use
that knowledge to attack problems faced by real organizations in our own community to
explore how applying design thinking methodologies can have true impact on real-world
organizations. Students will emerge from this course with a toolbox of innovation
techniques, real project work that they can use as examples of their practice of those
techniques, and the confidence that they are creative and innovative people. Students may
not receive credit for both Entrepreneurship 468 and Marketing 468.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENTR 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in entrepreneurship. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ENTR 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP. An opportunity for juniors and
seniors, with a minimum of fifteen hours in their major, to participate in individual job
experiences, domestic and international, under the supervision of an on-site manager and a
department faculty member. Internship must be within an entrepreneurial organization.
Products of the internship will include an evaluation by the on-site manager, a log of the
internship experience, and a paper describing the experience. A comparison-contrast
between academic learning and the internship experience will be conducted. Prerequisite:
Minimum grade point average, permission of department coordinator, and an appropriate
job site.
Semester course, one to six hours.
ENTR 488. SEMINAR IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP. An advanced course for junior and
senior Entrepreneurship majors to concentrate on specific subject matter to be determined
by the instructor. Individual research and extensive oral and written reports are required.
Semester course; one, two, or three hours.

204 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Exercise Science
Dr. Prins, Chair; Dr. Ault, Dr. Buxton, Dr. Gerhart.. Additional Instructional Faculty: Mr.
Patterson, Dr. Thrasher, Mr. Wise.
POLICIES GOVERNING THE EXERCISE SCIENCE PROGRAM
The Department of Exercise Science and Grove City College believe that a Christian
liberal arts college should teach the "whole individual”, giving careful attention to the
development of psychomotor (physical development), cognitive (basic reasoning), and the
affective (social, emotional and spiritual) behavioral goals of the student regardless of
his/her major.
In an attempt to realize this philosophy, the Department of Exercise Science presents a
balanced program that encompasses the many facets of exercise science. The specific
objectives of the program are to develop a heightened awareness of personal fitness and
wellness, to develop neuromuscular skills, to cultivate an interest in recreation, and to
encourage desirable social and moral standards.
VISION
The Department of Exercise Science is committed to educating, serving, and
developing student’s and future leaders to advance the state of lifelong health, wellness, and
physical activity among members of both local and extended communities.
MISSION
Our mission is to provide student-centered instruction, conduct research, perform
service, and promote health and well-being through discovery, learning, and participation
in the study of Exercise Science in a Christian community.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Exercise Science—92-95
hours
Exercise Science Core (59 hours):
Exercise Science 101, 203, 230, 244, 253, 254, 256, 258, 304, 306, 307, 309, 310,
312, 313, 377, 404, 407, and 480.
Exercise Science Electives (15-17 hours):
Choose fifteen hours from Exercise Science 134, 201, 202, 205, 215, 221, 235, 237,
240, 250, 251, 261, 305, 308, 344, 402, 403; or choose to complete one of the
following concentrations:
Athletic Training: Exercise Science 215, 237, 249, 251, 261, and three additional
hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above.
Coaching: Exercise Science 201, 205, 251, 305, Management 213, and three
additional hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above.
Personal Training: Exercise Science 202, 221, 240, 261, 402, and three additional
hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above.
Pre-Occupational Therapy: Psychology 209, 211, Sociology 101, Exercise
Science 215, 250, and one of Biology 102 or Psychology 312.
Pre-Physical Therapy: Biology 102, Chemistry 112 and 114, Physics 122,
Exercise Science 250, and one of Psychology 209 or 211.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 205

Strength & Conditioning: Exercise Science 221, 240, 261, 403, and three
additional hours from the Exercise Science courses listed above.
Major-Related Requirements (18-19 hours):
Biology 101; Chemistry 111 and 113; Mathematics 111 or 161; Physics 121; and
Psychology 201.
Courses that count in the Exercise Science major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “EXER” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.50 is required by the end of
the sophomore year and maintained through graduation. Transfer students and students
changing their major after freshman year will be evaluated after their second semester as an
Exercise Science major. Students on academic probation will be evaluated after one
semester and students below a 2.50 MQPA will be moved to the Undeclared (UNSE) major
designation. Students with a MQPA below 2.50 will not be permitted to register for EXER
480.
The following courses provide instruction in locating, evaluating and presenting
information related to the Exercise Science discipline: Exercise Science 377 Research
Methods — Writing Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL), and Exercise Science
307 Exercise Prescription— Speaking Intensive (SI)
Course Requirements for a Minor in Exercise Science (23 hours of required courses)
A minor in Exercise Science will consist of Exercise Science 101, 203, 221, 244 or
254, 253, 256, and 258. Biology 341 may be taken in the place of Exercise Science 253.
The Exercise Science minor curriculum has the potential to enrich the academic
preparation of students pursuing majors in Biology, Chemistry, Education, and even
Business Program majors with entrepreneurial aspirations in commercial or communitybased health, fitness, or athletics. The curriculum also provides an opportunity for students
in pursuit of health-related professions which require graduate studies, doctoral research
and/or professional training.
Course Requirements for a minor in Nutrition (15 hours)
A minor in Nutrition will consist of Exercise Science 134, 240, 244, 254, and 344.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Exercise Science (EXER)
EXER 101. INTRODUCTION TO EXERCISE SCIENCE. This course introduces
students to the field of Exercise Science, requirements for professional certification,
graduate school requirements, and career options in both health fitness and clinical fields.
Lecture topics will include the mission and vision of the American College of Sports
Medicine (ACSM), the Commission on Accreditation for Exercise Science, and the
Department of Exercise Science. Students will become familiar with the ACSM JTAs (Job
Task Analysis) which will be covered across the Exercise Science curriculum. Students will
begin to create individual portfolios to show how the JTAs and department objectives are
met across the curriculum.
Semester course, two hours.
EXER 134. INTRODUCTION TO NUTRITION. An introduction to the importance of
diet for present and future good health. Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, and
minerals, and their interactions will also be addressed. In addition, the course explores topics
such as label-reading, popular diets, dietary analysis, and other issues of current interest in

206 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

the field of nutrition, including sport and exercise nutrition, supplements, and life-cycle
nutrition.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EXER 201. ETHICS IN SPORTS. This course will explore the concepts of sport and
competition in the context of a Christian world view. Special emphasis will be given to the
theology of competition, a biblical foundation for spiritual integrity and ethical conduct, the
mind and heart of the Christian athlete, and character and performance as a matter of
Christian stewardship. Students will be encouraged in their spiritual maturity, promoting
their athletic and intellectual development.
Fall semester only, one hour.
EXER 202. LIFTING TECHNIQUES. This course introduces the practical skills
necessary to work in the field of Strength and Conditioning. Students will learn proper
coaching cues, movement patterns, lifting techniques, and communication skills required to
safely and successfully perform common Strength and Conditioning movements in the
weight room. This course will provide an introduction to both sport performance and general
population coaching and instruction. These foundational components of movement
efficiency are vital to the field of Strength and Conditioning, more specifically, the Personal
Training profession. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101.
Fall semester, one hour.
EXER 203. EXERCISE AND SPORT PSYCHOLOGY. This course provides an
overview of psychological theory, research and methodology with an emphasis on
application within diverse exercise settings. Topics include the history and development
exercise psychology, personal and environmental factors of physical activity, use of
counseling skills for behavior modification, and group processes within physical activity
and exercise. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EXER 205. INTRODUCTION TO SPORTS MINISTRY. This interdisciplinary course
will explore the spreading of the gospel and what it means to be a Christian athlete through
sport. Many opportunities for ministry are presented through sports as one of the most
powerful of social institutions in the world. A grace-based view of the theology of sports
and competition in lieu of a performance-based approach will be the cornerstone of this
course. Sports ministry will be examined as a tool for transforming lives through sharing
the Gospel, discipleship and mentoring.
Semester Course, three hours.
EXER 215. MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY. This is an online course that will help train
students to understand and speak commonly used terms in various healthcare fields. Topics
include word construction, body structure terminology, and terminology related to body
systems and disorders.
Online only, three hours.
EXER 221. PERSONAL TRAINING. This course will introduce students to the
profession of personal training. Students will develop skills in exercise technique, including
teaching approaches involving free-weight and machine exercises, cardiovascular activities,
flexibility, and plyometrics. Program designs will include the healthy adult as well as for
adults presenting unique challenges to exercise. Students will design and implement a
program for an assigned client, whom they will train throughout the second half of the
semester. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
EXER 230. INTRODUCTION TO EXERCISE PROGRAM DESIGN. This course will
instruct students in designing and implementing scientifically sound exercise programs.
This includes dynamic and static warmup, resistance training, aerobic conditioning, speed
and agility programming, and plyometrics. The process of needs analysis will be introduced
and covered. The students will be introduced to basic periodization theories and program

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 207

implementation and adjustment strategies. The course will also cover an introduction to
exercise equipment types, functions, and uses. For exercise science students, this course will
serve as an introduction to the pertinent skills and knowledge required of them in both their
professional internship and future career. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 101.
Semester course, three hours.
EXER 235. FACILITY MANAGEMENT. This course will focus on the proper
guidelines, standards and regulations necessary to successfully design and operate a safe
and functional health and fitness facility. The minimal performance codes needed to operate
legally will be examined, including compliance with the American Disabilities Act. The
necessary steps to ensure optimum performance of a health and fitness facility, such as
program development and marketing, will be discussed. This course will also cover
important topics such as compliance with the American Disabilities Act, incorporating
technical advances into the facility, hiring and training staff, emergency plans, risk
management policies, and all federal laws and guidelines to ensure the safety of both the
management and the users of a facility. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101.
Offered periodically, two hours.
EXER 237. SPECIAL TOPICS IN EXERCISE SCIENCE. The purpose of this course
is to introduce students to the EBP process and develop literacy abilities while investigating
hot topics relevant to sport and human performance. Topics covered will include the benefits
of EBP and the EBP process, conducting a literature search, appraising literature for best
evidence, various topics in sport and human performance (i.e. performance enhancing
drugs, movement screening for injury prediction and prevention, concurrent strength and
endurance training, weight loss strategies, etc.). Prerequisite: Exercise Science 256.
Summer online only, three hours.
EXER 240. DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS. This course provides an overview of the dietary
supplement industry, current regulations, product development process, and marketing of
products. Students will learn how to critically evaluate dietary supplements in terms of
claims, efficacy, and safety. This course, offered online, is open to all majors. Prerequisites:
Exercise Science 101 or 134.
Alternate years, spring semester and summer online only, three hours.
EXER 244. NUTRITION AND HEALTH. A study of the science of nutrition with an
emphasis on how nutrition influences health and wellbeing. Students will gain a
foundational knowledge of the role of nutrition in the development and treatment of chronic
diseases. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101 or 134.
Fall semester only, three hours.
EXER 249. INTRODUCTION TO ATHLETIC TRAINING. The course introduces the
role of the athletic trainer and concepts of sports medicine. Students will learn prevention,
evaluation and treatment for athletic injuries. The course will provide an introduction to
both the orthopedic assessment and management process as well as basics of biomechanics
and ethical issues in the Athletic Training profession. Prerequisite: Sophomore Standing.
Fall semester, one hour.
EXER 250. INTRODUCTION TO PHYSICAL AND OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY.
This course will provide an introduction to the practices of physical and occupational
therapy. It will integrate studies in biology and anatomy for application in future careers in
physical or occupational therapy. Students will learn how to take basic medical histories,
have an introduction to performing a general physical examination, and begin to develop
differential diagnoses for various musculoskeletal processes. In addition, students will begin
to investigate therapy modalities applicable to a variety of therapy needs. Throughout this

208 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

course, students will gain knowledge helpful in their transition into the first year of an
advanced health professional program. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing.
Spring semester only, one hour.
EXER 251. PREVENTION AND CARE OF INJURIES. The purpose of this course is
to give the students the knowledge and skills necessary to prevent and care for athletic
related injuries. The topics covered include fitness training, nutrition, sports equipment,
emergency situations, blood borne pathogens, environmental conditions, taping techniques,
injury rehabilitation, psychological concerns with injuries, recognition of injuries, and the
basic anatomy of and common injuries to the different parts of the body. There is an
additional fee required for this course. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EXER 253. ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY I. This course will introduce the student to
human anatomy and physiology with emphasis on the various body systems and how they
integrate with one another. The effect of exercise on each system will be explored and
clinical examples will be discussed. Laboratory exercises will include simulations using
physical and computer models, as well as introductory tissue dissections. Two lectures and
one lab per week. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101 or Biology 341.
Fall semester only, four hours.
EXER 254. NUTRITION IN SPORTS AND EXERCISE. Using USDA
recommendations, this course will explore nutritional strategies for all levels of physical
activity and competitive sports. Emphasis will be placed on energy balance, substrate
metabolism, hydration, ergogenic aids, nutritional supplementation, and banned substances.
Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101 or 134.
Fall semester and summer online only, three hours.
EXER 256. PHYSIOLOGY OF EXERCISE. This course will survey the acute and
chronic effects of exercise on human systems. Students will be introduced to the essentials
of human movement, energy metabolism, cardiorespiratory function, and sport
performance. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 253 or
Biology 341.
Semester course, four hours.
EXER 258. ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY II. A continuation of the study of human
anatomy and physiology with emphasis on the various body systems and how they integrate
with one another. The effect of exercise on each system will be explored and clinical
examples will be discussed. Laboratory exercises will include simulations using physical
and computer models, as well as introductory tissue dissections. Two lectures and one lab
per week. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 253. Equivalent course: Biology 346 (Mammalian
Physiology).
Spring semester only, four hours.
EXER 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in exercise
science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EXER 261. CORRECTIVE EXERCISE STRATEGIES. This course will use a
combination of interactive lectures and hands-on workshop style teaching methods to teach
students how to identify common postural and movement dysfunctions and the exercise
strategies to address them. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 256 and 258.
Fall semester and summer online, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 209

EXER 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in exercise science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EXER 290. STUDIES IN EXERCISE SCIENCE. A course that covers special topics
related to exercise science.
Semester course; one, two or three hours.
EXER 304. EXERCISE TESTING. This course will cover fitness testing procedures for
healthy and clinical populations. The course will follow the American College of Sports
Medicine Guidelines for Exercise Testing. There will be a balance between lecture and
laboratory work. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 256.
Semester course, three hours.
EXER 305. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF COACHING. This course will introduce the
principles of coaching team and individual sports. The student will be able to identify and
demonstrate the personal and professional qualities required to become an effective coach
at any level. The student will be able to develop a basic philosophy regarding the ethical
and logical decision-making processes involved in coaching sports.
Semester course, two hours.
EXER 306. EXERCISE LEADERSHIP. This course will focus on the practical skills
necessary to teach group exercise classes. It will provide a survey of basic instructor skills
such as music selection, choreography and cueing. All students will experience introductory
class leadership in a variety of traditional and contemporary modes of group exercise
including strength, flexibility, cardiovascular, and equipment-based classes. Prerequisite:
Exercise Science 230.
Semester course, two hours.
EXER 307. EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION. This course focuses on developing exercise
prescriptions for healthy populations as well as those with chronic diseases. Prescriptions
will be based on possible client goals of improved health, fitness or quality of life (abilities
to perform activities of daily living). All course work will follow the standards set by the
American College of Sports Medicine. This course meets the Speaking Intensive (SI)
requirement for the Exercise Science major. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 256.
Fall semester only, three hours.
EXER 308. TACTICAL STRENGTH AND CONDITIONING. This course introduces
the practical skills necessary to work in the field of Strength and Conditioning. Students
will learn proper coaching cues, movement patterns, lifting techniques, and communication
skills required to perform common Strength and Conditioning movements safely and
successfully in the weight room. This course will provide an introduction to both sport
performance and general population coaching and instruction. These foundational
components of movement efficiency are vital to the field of Strength and Conditioning,
more specifically, the Personal Training profession. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 230 and
307.
Spring semester, two hours.
EXER 309. BIOMECHANICS. The purpose of this course is to study biomechanical
concepts and principles with special focus on their applications in human movement and
physical activity. Students will examine the relationship between internal and external
biomechanical factors and their effect on human performance and mechanisms of injury.
Both qualitative and quantitative approaches will be discussed and applied to movement
observation. Prerequisites: Physics 121; and Exercise Science 258 or Biology 346.
Fall semester course, three hours.

210 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

EXER 310. FUNCTIONAL KINESIOLOGY. This course will provide a greater
understanding of how humans move from an integrative functional anatomy and applied
biomechanical lens. Specifically, muscle groups and their functional relationships will be
presented with application to simple mechanical principles. Course emphasis will be placed
on anatomical and mechanical analysis of motion as it pertains to human movement in sports
and exercise. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 256 and 258.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EXER 312. DIET, EXERCISE, AND CHRONIC DISEASE. This course will focus on
prevalent chronic diseases including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease,
dyslipidemia; the pathophysiology and etiology of these conditions; and the role of lifestyle
factors such as diet and exercise in disease prevention and treatment. Prerequisite: Exercise
Science 244 and 256.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EXER 313. ADVANCED EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY. This course will focus on the
integrative physiology and physiological responses to exercise. Specifically, this course will
cover energetics, metabolism, and endocrine physiology, as well as discuss cardiovascular
hemodynamics in various environments and respiratory exercise physiology. Prerequisites:
Exercise Science 256 and 258.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EXER 344. LIFE CYCLE NUTRITION. A survey of nutrition needs throughout the
stages of the life cycle, including pregnancy and lactation, infancy, adolescence, adult, and
aging. The socioeconomic, cultural, and psychological influences on food and nutrition
behavior will also be addressed. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 101 or 134 or Biology 101.
Spring semester and summer online, three hours.
EXER 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in exercise
science. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EXER 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in exercise science. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EXER 377. RESEARCH METHODS IN EXERCISE SCIENCE. This course will
introduce basic methods of reading, understanding, evaluating, and applying research.
Students will experience quantitative research, qualitative research, mixed-model research
and research reviews. Students will also become acquainted with statistical concepts in
research planning and design. Working in research teams, students will complete a servicelearning project for the Early Education Center (EEC). They will also write a research
proposal to be continued and completed in EXER 407. This course meets the Writing
Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the Exercise Science major.
Prerequisites: Exercise Science 256; Psychology 201; and Exercise Science 230 or 307.
Fall semester only, three hours.
EXER 402. CERTIFIED EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGIST. This course will integrate the
EXER curriculum, specifically the objectives of the ACSM certified Exercise Physiologist
(EP-C). The job task analyses (JTAs) specific to the EP-C exam will be covered in detail.
Students will apply the EP-C JTAs in class and with personal training clients. Prerequisites:
Exercise Science 304 and 307.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EXER 403. PRINCIPLES OF STRENGTH AND CONDITIONING. This course will
serve as preparation for students who will be taking the Certified Strength and Conditioning

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION/ 211

Specialist (CSCS) certification exam given by the National Strength and Conditioning
Association. Prerequisite: Exercise Science 304 and 307. Fall semester only, three hours.
EXER 404. PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION AND SEMINAR. This course
provides instructor-guided preparation for a professional certification exam offered by
ACSM or NSCA. There is an additional cost incurred by the student to register for the
certification exam and purchase the study materials, including practice exams, from the
certifying organization. Students will determine which certification exam best matches their
future career and complete it prior to the end of the semester, on or before Study Day. In
addition, students will be required to complete a professional portfolio that will represent
the body of work completed in the Exercise Science major. Prerequisite: Exercise Science
480.
Fall semester only, one hour.
EXER 407. RESEARCH PRACTICUM. The students will complete the original group
research project created in EXER 377, including data collection, statistical analysis, and a
final report. Students will complete an individual research proposal. Prerequisites: Exercise
Science 304 and 377.
Spring semester only, three hours.
EXER 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in exercise
science. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EXER 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in exercise science. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
EXER 480. INTERNSHIP. Students will earn academic credit for field experience in the
areas of applied Exercise Science, such as coaching, athletic training, strength and
conditioning, health and fitness, physical therapy, and nutrition. Students will first
determine their career path and corresponding professional certification. Then students will
locate a facility along with an onsite supervisor for their internship. Professional dress is
expected each day of the internship. Grade is dependent upon written evaluation by an onsite supervisor and the submission of the student’s written report to the Department of
Physical Education. Students majoring in Exercise Science must earn at least five credits
(300 clock hours) for this course. Prerequisites: Exercise Science 304, 306, and 307.
Semester course, one to six hours.

Physical Education (PHYE)
The Physical Education program at GCC is designed to provide students with
foundational knowledge and physical activity opportunities to begin shaping their own
health and wellness habits. Physical Education 100 Healthful Living is a required course
that all students will take in their first year at Grove City College. It is an 8-week course
offered online during the fall and spring semesters. Current evidence and best practices will
be presented by Grove City College’s Exercise Science faculty and the Counseling Center’s
staff. All other Physical Education courses are offered as general electives and focus on the
development of lifelong skills which will hopefully lead to a lifetime of healthy physical
activity.
Upon completion of PHYE 100, a student may choose up to six additional hours of
physical education courses with the “PHYE” prefix, but not more than one course per
semester. Duplication of courses for credit is prohibited and the Department of Exercise
Science reserves the right to cancel any course based on insufficient enrollment.

212 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

PHYE 100. HEALTHFUL LIVING. This course introduces students to fundamental
concepts associated with healthful living throughout the lifespan in modern society. The
course will focus upon the promotion of health and wellness within individuals, families,
and communities through an understanding of healthful living, development of healthy
lifestyles, and avoiding or overcoming harmful habits. Current research and best practices
will be presented to further students’ knowledge and help them to shape their own strategies
for a healthy and fit future.
Semester course, online only, one hour.
PHYE 190. STUDIES IN PHYCIAL EDUCATION. A course that covers special topics
related to athletics and physical education.
Semester course; one, two or three hours.
PHYE 201. RACQUETBALL. The purpose of this course is to teach the fundamental
skills and knowledge of the sport of racquetball. It will consist of lecture, practice of specific
skills, and competition. Students will develop an appreciation of racquet ball as a means to
a healthy use of leisure time. Two hours per week.
Spring semester only, one hour.
PHYE 207. BEGINNING BOWLING. This course will introduce students to the basic
sport of bowling. Students will learn the nature and purpose of the game; lane, pin, and ball
specifications; rules; basic skills; and tactical strategies of the game. Two hours per week.
Semester course, one hour.
PHYE 209. TENNIS. This course introduces students to the concept of tennis and its nature
and purpose. Tennis can be the most demanding sport, or it can be played purely as a social
diversion. It can be played by almost anyone at almost any skill level and the rules are the
same the world over. Students will develop an appreciation for tennis as a valuable method
of exercise that can be continued throughout one’s lifetime, increasing the development of
cardio-respiratory and muscular endurance. Two hours per week.
Semester course, one hour.
PHYE 217. VOLLEYBALL. This course teaches students the specific skills and
knowledge of the sport of volleyball. Class will consist of lecture, practice of fundamental
skills necessary for success and competition. Students will develop an appreciation for
volleyball as a means to use leisure time in a healthy manner as they demonstrate an
understanding of the fundamental skills, rules, and strategies necessary to participate in the
sport of volleyball. Two hours per week.
Spring semester only, one hour.
PHYE 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Physical
Education. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PHYE 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in physical education. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair,
and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PHYE 290. STUDIES IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION. A course that covers special topics
related to athletics and physical education.
Semester course; one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 213

History
Dr. Graham, Chair; Dr. Baker, Dr. Edwards, Dr. Harp, Dr. Mitchell.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in History—42 hours
History Core Requirements (33 hours):
History 103, 143, 144, 201, 283, 285, and 400.
One course from: History 334, 336, 349, 350, 357, or 379.
One course from: History230, or 231.
Two courses from: History 206 or 207 (choose one), 208, 209, or 212.
History Electives (9 hours):
Three courses from: History 300- or 400-level courses, Political Science 317,
Political Science 318, or Religion 341.
Courses that count in the History major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “HIST” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in History and Social Studies
Secondary Education Certification—88 hours
History Core Requirements (30 hours):
History 103, 141, 143, 144, 201, 209, 212, 283, 285, and 357.
Major-Related Requirements (18 hours):
Economics 101, 102; Political Science 201, 204; and Sociology 103 and 201.
Education Requirements (40 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 316, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
History majors are strongly encouraged to take courses in languages, the humanities
and the social sciences in their programs if they plan to attend graduate school in history.
Courses at the 200 and 300 levels are open to all students.
The History Department seeks to equip their students with skills in professional
writing, speaking and information literacy. History 143 is designated as Information
Literacy (IL) course, and History 201 and 400 are designated as Writing Intensive (WI) and
Speaking Intensive (SI), and IL courses. Information literacy instruction includes defining
and framing significant historical research questions; distinguishing different types of
sources; using databases to find relevant sources; critically evaluating www sites; citing
sources correctly, respecting intellectual property and avoiding plagiarism; and synthesizing
material from a range of electronic and traditional sources and presenting it in a cogent
manner.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for additional
details on teacher certification requirements.
Course Requirements for a minor in Classical Studies (21 hours)
A minor in Classical Studies will consist of History 207); English 302; Political Science
355 or Philosophy 231; and twelve additional hours from History 204, 206, 207 , 209, 346,
376, 410; Religion 211, 212; Political Science 355 or Philosophy 231; Greek 101, 102, 201,

214 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

202, 260, 360, 460; Latin 101, 102, 201, 202, 290; Art 201; Communication Arts 427; Music
331; and Sociology 103.
Course Requirements for a minor in Classical Christian Education (23 hours)
A minor in Classical Christian Education will consist of History 204, 208, 410, 480 (2
cr); and twelve additional hours from History 206, 207 209, 346, 376; Religion 211, 212;
Political Science 355; Philosophy 231; Greek 101, 102, 201, 202, 260, 360, 460; Latin 101,
102, 201, 202, 290; Art 201; Communication Arts 427; Music 331; and Sociology 103.
Course Requirements for a minor in History (18 hours)
A minor in History will consist of six hours from each of the three following areas:
American History: History 283, 285, 334, 336, 349, 350, 357, or 379.
European History: History 208, 209, 212, 261, 262, 265, or 372.
Other History Electives: History 143, 144, 206, 207, 231, 260, 270, 346, 360, 370, 375,
376, 378, 390, 400, 460, 470, 480, 488; History 317, 318 or Political Science 317, 318;
or Religion 341.
Course Requirements for a minor in Medieval Studies (21 hours)
A minor in Medieval Studies will consist of English 304, History 208, Philosophy 232,
and twelve hours from Art 201, English 224, 390 ( Bible Study Before the Reformation),
French 320, History 261, 346, Latin 102, 290 (Reading Latin), Music 331, Religion 341,
390 (Bible Study Before the Reformation), and Spanish 330.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

History (HIST)
HIST 103. FRESHMAN SEMINAR. This course is designed to take beginning history
majors methodically through the process and techniques of historical research, from the
crafting of a question through written and oral presentations of one’s work. Students will
also be introduced to the philosophical dimensions of the discipline including ways in which
the historian may contribute to the common good. Topics of study vary depending on the
instructor.
Spring semester, three hours.
HIST 120. FOUNDATIONS OF HISTORY. An introduction to the principal theories,
ideas, concepts, methods, and debates that have shaped the discipline of history. The course
examines competing perspectives on history, human nature, and providence. It analyzes
how historians use and evaluate evidence and provides Christian perspectives on history.
Semester course, three hours.
HIST 141. WORLD GEOGRAPHY. An exploration of the physical and human
geography of the globe. Students will study the mutual interaction of demographic,
economic, political, social, and geographic factors in human history.
Fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 143. WORLD HISTORY I. A survey of the basic history of world societies from
the earliest recorded development of human civilizations to the late medieval period. As an
Information Literacy (IL) course, it emphasizes designing historical research questions;
finding, evaluating, and using primary and secondary sources; citing sources properly; and
writing a cogent paper.
Fall semester only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 215

HIST 144. WORLD HISTORY II. A survey of the history of world societies from the
early modern period to the present. Special emphasis is given to the interrelationship
between the Western world and the non-Western world. Spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 201. HISTORIOGRAPHY. An introduction to the art and craft of history. Students
learn the basics of the discipline of history, focusing on what historians do and have done,
the essential concepts and methodologies they use, and the vocabularies they employ.
Students sharpen the skills essential for work as a historian: critical reading, effective
analysis, excellent writing, and skillful communication. This course fulfills the Writing
Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for
History and SESS majors.
Semester course, three hours.
HIST 204. HISTORICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF
EDUCATION. A survey of the historical and philosophical foundations of education from
antiquity to the present day. It includes an analysis of political, sociological, and financial
issues related to American education with emphasis upon understanding the contributions
of Western Civilization and the impact of American institutions on systems of education.
Semester course, three hours.
HIST 206. ANCIENT EMPIRES I: NEAR EAST AND GREECE. A survey of ancient
Near Eastern, Aegean and Hellenistic worlds with emphasis on the formation of and
resistance to empires. The course explores the varied cultural legacies of these ancient
cultures and civilizations.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 207. ANCIENT EMPIRES II: ROME. This course provides an overview of the
history of Rome, beginning with its western Mediterranean setting and tracing its
development as a Republic and then its formation as an ancient empire stretching from
Britain to the Tigris, and from the Danube to the Sahara. The course analyzes in some detail
the dynamics of Roman imperialism as well as the varied responses of diverse groups which
found themselves under Rome’s sway. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 208. MEDIEVAL EUROPE. A survey of Europe from the end of the Roman Empire
to the early fifteenth century that emphasizes the cultural and intellectual legacy of the
Middle Ages.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 209. RENAISSANCE AND EARLY MODERN EUROPE. An examination of the
Renaissance, the formation of nation states in the fifteenth century, the Reformation of the
sixteenth century, and the political, social, and intellectual origins of modern Europe before
the French Revolution.
Fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 212. MODERN EUROPE. An examination of European states and the nature of
European identity from 1789 to the present, focusing on political, economic, and social
revolutions; the impact of the global wars of the twentieth century; and the tensions
surrounding European integration from 1945 onward.
Semester course, three hours.
HIST 230. MODERN SOUTH ASIAN HISTORY. This course introduces the major
themes, ideas, and events of Modern South Asian history. While each of the modern
constituent nations (India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, and Sri Lanka) will
be discussed in comparison to one another, this course will focus on the regions known
today as India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh. We will examine social change, intellectual
movements, and the political currents of South Asia from the seventeenth century to the
present. This class will also include introductions to the cultures of South Asia through
food, major holidays, major religions, and contemporary politics. At the end of this class,

216 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

students will be able to narrate the major events of Modern South Asian history, understand
better its cultural and physical geography, and recognize the ways South Asia’s past shapes
its contemporary roles in the world.
Spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 231. MODERN LATIN AMERICAN HISTORY. The story of Latin America from
the beginning of the colonial period to the present. The class explores the geography and
history of those countries colonized by Spain and Portugal in the sixteenth century, which
still preserve the influence of Iberian political and social principles today. It also examines
the subsequent political, social, and economic development of Latin America, the
complicated relationships between individual countries in this region, and the increasing
relationships between the region as a whole and the rest of the world.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 253. UNITED STATES HISTORY SURVEY. An introductory survey of American
history from its colonial origins to the present. This course will examine significant political,
social, geographic, economic, religious, and cultural developments. Prerequisite: Middle
Level Education majors only.
Fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in history.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HIST 261. BRITISH HISTORY TO 1781. A survey of British history with special
emphasis on the development of the common law, parliament, and the British constitution.
Recommended for pre-law students.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
HIST 262. BRITISH HISTORY SINCE 1781. A survey of British history with special
emphasis on Britain as an imperial power and on political, social, and cultural developments
at home.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.
HIST 265. HISTORY OF SPAIN, 1500 TO PRESENT. An introduction to Spanish
history from the union of the Crowns of Castile and Aragon to the present day. The central
theme of the course is the problem of identity—how have the Iberian peoples identified
themselves over time—and the political, religious, economic, and social difficulties
historically associated with identity.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in history. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HIST 283. HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES TO 1865. An introductory survey of
American history from its colonial origins until the end of the Civil War. The course
examines political, social, economic, religious, and cultural developments.
Fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 285. HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES SINCE 1865. An introductory survey
of American history from Reconstruction to the present. The course examines political,
social, economic, religious, and cultural developments. Spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 317. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES I. A study of the
development of the United States Constitution through use of the case study method. This
course especially focuses on the constitutional powers of the three branches of government,
the relationship between state and federal governmental powers, and property rights and

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 217

economic liberties. Students may not receive credit for both History 317 and Political
Science 317.
Fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 318. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES II. A study of the
development of the United States Constitution through the use of the case study method.
This course especially focuses on the idea of equality and the equal protection clause, due
process, privacy and liberty rights, freedom of speech, press and religion and other Bill of
Rights issues. Students may not receive credit for both History 318 and Political Science
318.
Spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 334. AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. An exploration of arguably the pivotal event in
American history, this course will examine the origins, events, ramifications, and
presentations of the war. Students will study its decisive moments, seminal leaders, and
formative ideas as well as examining historiographical and popular treatments of the war.
Students will delve into both primary and secondary historical sources, including biography
and fiction, in order to understand the events, portrayals, analyses, and impact of the Civil
War.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 336. UNITED STATES MILITARY HISTORY. A study of the socio-political,
economic, technological and human aspects of war that traces the development of “the
American art of war” from the early colonial period to the present.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 346. BYZANTIUM AND ISLAM. A thematic overview of the pre-modern
Byzantine and Islamic worlds, from their common roots in the Mediterranean world of Late
Antiquity to the establishment of the Islamic Empires and Kingdoms of the Near East, Asia,
and Africa. The course traces the transformation, flourishing, and decline of Byzantium
concurrently with the rise of Islam to world dominance.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 349. AMERICAN RELIGIOUS HISTORY. An exploration of religion in America
that focuses on the various individuals and religious groups, events, ideas, and organizations
that have had the most significant impact on American life.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 350. SPORTS IN AMERICAN HISTORY. An overview of sports in America from
colonial times until the present that focuses especially on the relationship between sports
and society and issues of race, class, and gender.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 357. MINORITIES IN AMERICAN HISTORY. An examination of the experience
of minority groups in America focusing on Native Americans, immigrants, women, African
Americans, and Asian Americans. The course analyzes the problems these groups
experienced and their contributions to America.
Spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An advanced course for students with substantial
background in college history courses. Intensive and independent research into a particular
historical question. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HIST 365. VIETNAM. This course will cover the history of Vietnam and its people from
their Bronze Age beginnings through the Indochina Wars of the twentieth century to their
evolving position in Southeast Asia at the turn of the new millennium. This course seeks to

218 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

rectify the overbearing “Hawk” and “Dove” perspectives that see “the Vietnam War”
chiefly through the lens of American political and social history. The focus will instead be
placed on Vietnam’s ability to absorb foreign influences while at the same time adopting
these influences to create a vibrant and comparatively strong identity.
Fall semester course, three hours.
HIST 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in history. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HIST 372. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION AND NAPOLEON. An investigation of the
French Revolution and Napoleonic France. Organized in a seminar format, this course
analyzes the causes, major players, events, and consequences of the French Revolution. It
explores the significant ideas that influenced or arose out of the French Revolution and the
effect these ideas have on our current understanding of politics, society, and human nature.
It assesses the pivotal role Napoleon Bonaparte played in the French Revolution and the
debate over whether he represents the fruition of, or the antithesis to, the Revolution.
Finally, the course examines the concept of revolution, evaluating the description or
definitions of revolutions, and similarities between the French and other modern or premodern revolution.
Semester course, three hours.
HIST 376. ALEXANDER THE GREAT AND THE HELLENISTIC WORLD. An
exploration of the life of Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic world created by his
conquests. The course analyzes how the traditions of the Greeks were synthesized with the
heritage of western Asia and northeast Africa to shape a world stretching from the Balkans
to India.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
HIST 378. FOOD AND FEASTING IN THE WESTERN TRADITION. An
examination of the mystery and wonder of man as the only animal who eats instead of feeds.
The course will analyze the dining patterns and habits of the Hebrews, Greeks, Romans, and
early Christians. Through the developments in dining brought about by the Industrial
Revolution and the global economy, students will learn that mealtimes are more than a mere
intersection of meat and drink. On a deeper level, our meals represent the intersection of
theology, philosophy, history, and poetry. This amazing interplay reaches its epic
fulfillment in the Feast – a special time at which family, congregations, and local
communities gather round to celebrate the Abundance and the Divine.
Spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 379. AMERICAN INTELLECTUAL HISTORY. A study of American thought
from the colonial era to the mid twentieth century. This course examines a variety of
significant texts and key thinkers, seeking to understand them within their particular
historical and cultural contexts.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 390. STUDIES IN HISTORY. Specialized subject matter that varies each semester
depending upon interests of the instructor and students.
Semester course, three hours.
HIST 400. SENIOR RESEARCH SEMINAR. A seminar designed to take seniors
methodically through the process of writing a substantial research paper in history. It
includes selecting a topic, conducting research (mostly in primary sources), constructing a
detailed outline, writing, and presenting a paper. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive
(WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for History
majors.
Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 219

HIST 410. SEMINAR IN CLASSICAL & CHRISTIAN EDUCATION. An intensive
exploration of how the Christian faith illuminates academic study. This course will examine
how faith and learning interacted in the West historically as well as how to apply the
Christian faith to the operation of educational institutions and disciplines in the future.
Throughout the course, special emphasis will be placed on contemporary ClassicalChristian school movement as a case study of one-way Christians are currently attempting
to bring historical lessons and their faith to bear on education.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
HIST 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An advanced course for students with substantial
background in college history courses. Intensive and independent research into a particular
historical question. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HIST 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in history. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HIST 480. INTERNSHIP IN HISTORY. A semester of intensive study and work, usually
off-campus, undertaken by the student with the approval of the faculty of the Department
of History. A student must have a minimum QPA of 3.0 and may not have completed an
internship in any other department, although exceptions may be made for a GCCI internship.
Students are required to keep a journal of weekly activities and complete a project agreed
upon with the Department. An internship in history may be taken at any institution that
practices Public History.
Semester course, one to six hours.
HIST 488. SEMINAR IN HISTORY. An advanced course for junior and senior students
desiring an in-depth exploration of one historical problem, involving individual research,
discussion, oral reports, and written essays. Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
HIST 499. HONORS IN HISTORY. Seniors who have shown special aptitude in history
may, upon invitation and permission of the department, undertake special research in
history. A 30-page historical paper and a defense of the paper before the history faculty are
required.
Semester course, three hours.

Management and Marketing
Dr. Kocur, Chair; Dr. Biddle, Mr. Butler, Dr. Carson, Dr. Crute, Ms. Havrilla, Dr. Markley,
Dr. Powell, Dr. J. Smith. Additional Instructional Faculty: Dr. Banyas, Mr. Blaine, Dr.
Coyne, Dr. DiStasi, Mr. Lewis, Mrs. J. Miller, Mr. R. Miller.
The mission of the Business Program at Grove City College is to prepare our
students to become effective and ethical leaders in business as well as in society
as a whole. This mission incorporates the following learning outcomes:
1. Business Knowledge and Analytical Skills- Our students will possess the
knowledge and analytical skills necessary in their professional field.
2. Communication Skills-Our students will possess the written and verbal
skills needed to communicate effectively in a business environment.
3. Ethics-Our students will develop an understanding of business which
reflects its moral and ethical responsibilities to all potential stakeholders.
4. Global Perspective-Our students will develop an understanding of the
global and multi-cultural issues in the current business environment.

220 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Seven degree programs are offered in the Department of Management and Marketing:
Bachelor of Science in Business Analysis, Bachelor of Science in Business Statistics,
Bachelor of Science in Human Resource Management, Bachelor of Science in International
Business, Bachelor of Science in Management, Bachelor of Science in Marketing and
Bachelor of Science in Supply Chain Management. All seven programs integrate the
international aspects of business in course content as it applies to appropriate functional
areas of study.
In addition to the seven majors offered by the Department of Management and
Marketing, the college also offers degree programs in Accounting, Business Economics,
Economics, Entrepreneurship, and Finance. For more details on these majors, see the
listings in this catalog for the Departments of Accounting and Finance, Economics, and
Entrepreneurship.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Analysis—66-69
hours
Business Core (33 hours):
Accounting 201, 202; Computer Science 141, Finance 301; International Business
205; Management 103, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104 and Statistics 131.
Economics Core (6 hours):
Economics 101, 102.
Business Analysis Major Requirements (18 hours):
Management 204, 307, 310, Computer Science 220, 244 and Statistics 132.
Business Analysis Concentration* (9-12 hours):
Complete one of the following concentrations:
Accounting: Accounting 301, 302, and three hours from Management 325 or any
300-400 level Accounting course.
Analytics: Mathematics 161, 162, and one of Mathematics 214, 232, 261, 262, or
Statistics 331.
Finance: Finance 332, 341, and 440.
Marketing: Marketing 411, 415, and three hours from International Business 416,
Management 325, Marketing 330, 370, 411, 417, 468, or 480.
Operations/Supply Chains: Management 302, 424, and three hours from
Management 311, 325, 450, 457, 480, and International Business 417.
Software: Nine hours from Computer Science 222 or higher Computer Science
courses and/or any DSCI courses.
Sports Management: Management 213, and six hours from Management 313,
325, 480 (max three hours), Exercise Science 201, 220, 235, or 305.
*Note: Students who successfully complete the requirements for a second major
in Accounting, Business Economics, Computer Science, Economics,
Entrepreneurship, Finance, International Business, Management, Marketing, or
Mathematics are exempt from the Business Analysis Concentration requirement.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 221

Courses that count in the Business Analysis major quality point average
(MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “COMP”, “DSCI”, “ENTR”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE
105), “INBS”, “MARK”, “MATH”, “MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106) prefix, and STAT
131 and 132. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
The Business Analysis major prepares graduates for careers in business analysis, data
analysis, project leadership, business management, market research, financial analysis, and
management analysis.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Statistics—67-70
hours
Business Statistics Core (46 hours):
Computer Science 141, 220, 244; Data Science 215; Mathematics 161, 162, 214,
261, and Statistics 131, 132, 331, 332, 412, and 414.
Business Core (12 hours):
Accounting 201; Finance 301; Management 103; and Marketing 104.
Business Statistics Concentration* (9-12 hours):
Complete one of the following concentrations:
Accounting: Accounting 202, 301, 302, and three hours from Management 325
or any 300-400 level Accounting course.
Business Analysis: Management 204, 307, and 310.
Economics: Economics 101, 102, and three hours of Economics courses.
Finance: Finance 341, Mathematics 232, and three hours from Finance 332, 435,
436, 440, 480, or Management 325.
Marketing: Marketing 411, 415, and three hours from Marketing 330, 370, 417,
468, 480, International Business 416, or Management 325.
Operations/Supply Chain: Management 204, 424, and three hours from
Management 302, 307, 310, 311, 325, 450, 457, 480, and International Business
417.
Software: Nine hours from Computer Science 222 or higher Computer Science
courses and/or any DSCI courses.
Sports Analytics: Management 213, and six hours from Management 313, 325,
480 (max three hours), Exercise Science 201, 220, 235, or 305.
*Note: Students who successfully complete the requirements for a second major
in Accounting, Business Economics, Computer Science, Economics,
Entrepreneurship, Finance, International Business, Management, Marketing, or
Mathematics are exempt from the Business Statistics Concentration requirement.

222 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Courses that count in the Business Statistics major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “COMP”, “DSCI”, “MNGT”(excluding MNGT 106), “MATH”
prefix, and STAT 131, 132, 331, 332, 412, 414. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to
graduate.
The Business Statistics major prepares graduates for careers in statistics in applied
business contexts. Job titles include market researcher, financial risk analyst, investment
analyst, business logistics specialist, management analyst, supply chain analyst, statistician,
and others.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Human Resource
Management—67 hours
Business Core (33 hours):
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103,
110 or 111, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104 and Statistics 131.
Math/Economics Courses (10 hours):
Economics 101, 102; Mathematics 141 or 161.
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261.
Human Resource Major Core (15 hours):
Management 433, 457, 458, 462, and 465.
Human Resource Major Electives (9 hours):
Choose three courses from Management 110, 304, 307, 311, 475, 480 (max 3 hours),
Accounting 303, Communication Arts 225, Psychology 208, or Psychology 310.
Courses that count in the Human Resource Management major quality point average
(MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “FNCE”, “INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefix, excluding
MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
The Human Resource Management major prepares graduates to pursue a career as a
human resource professional in any form of organization including both for-profit and notfor-profit contexts. Students will be prepared to be a human resource generalist in smaller
firms, as well as to occupy specialist roles in functional areas such as recruiting,
compensation, benefits, training, and risk and insurance in larger firms.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in International Business—82
hours
Business Core (33 hours):
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103,
110 or 111, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104 and Statistics 131.
Math/Economics Courses (10 hours):
Economics 101, 102; and Mathematics 141 or 161.
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261.
International Business Core (9 hours):
Choose three courses from International Business 408, 416, 417, 445 (required for
Management and Marketing concentrations); Economics 202, 206, 303;
Entrepreneurship 307, 312; or Finance 462 (required for Accounting and Finance

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 223

concentrations). With advance Department Chair approval, Accounting,
Entrepreneurship, Finance, International Business, Marketing, or Management 390
may count toward this requirement. Note: Students completing the Entrepreneurship
Concentration may not count ENTR 312 toward the International Business Core.
Business Concentration (12 hours):
Complete one of the following six concentrations:
Accounting: Accounting 301, 303, 321, and any 300-400- level accounting
course.
Economics: Economics 301, 302; and any two Economics courses. Note:
Economics 202, 206, and 303 cannot be used to fulfill both the concentration and
international business core requirements.
Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurship 312, 430, and 466; and one course from
Entrepreneurship 309, 318, or 423.
Finance: Finance 332, 440; and two courses from Finance 334, 341, 435, or 436.
Management: Management 457; and three courses from Management 302, 304,
307, 311, 433, 450, 458, or 475.
Marketing: Marketing 411, 419; and two courses from International Business
416, 417, Management 424; Marketing 315, 316, 412, 415, 417, or 420. Note:
International Business 416 and 417 cannot be used to fulfill both the concentration
and international business core requirements.
Global Emphasis (6 hours):
Choose two courses from Communication Arts 225; any Global Studies (GOBL)
course; or any non-United States History or Political Science course.
Foreign Language Concentration (12 hours):
Choose one of the following three options (for placement and course sequencing,
consult with the Department of Modern Languages):
French: One course from French 301, 305, or 340; French 307; and two 200-300level French courses.
Spanish: Spanish 303 and three 200-300-level Spanish courses.
Other: Twelve credits in a single modern language with the approval of the Chair
of the Department of Modern Language.
Foreign Study Requirement:
At least three hours must be earned outside the United States through an approved
study abroad program (ABRD 300), Grove City College travel course, or Grove City
College international internship.
Courses that count in the International Business major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE 105), “FREN”,
“INBS”, “MARK”, “MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106), “SPAN” prefix, COMM 225, ECON
303, GOBL 300, and STAT 131. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.

224 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

The International Business major focuses on the international context of business and
is designed to prepare students for participation in worldwide business activity. This
program combines substantial preparation in international business, business, modern
languages, and other related international courses. International Business majors are
strongly encouraged to take additional advanced courses in culture, literature, and grammar
in their chosen language of study and to study an additional foreign language.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Management—67 hours
Business Core (33 hours):
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103,
110 or 111, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104 and Statistics 131.
Math/Economics Courses (10 hours):
Economics 101, 102; and Mathematics 141 or 161.
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261.
Management Major Core (6 hours):
Management 457, 475
Minor or Second Major (18 hours)
A minimum of 18 credit hours in the minor or second major must not overlap with any of
the 49 credit hours required in the Business Core, the Math/Economics Courses, and the
Management Major Core.
Courses that count in the Management major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE 105), “INBS”,
“MARK”, “MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106) prefix, and STAT 131. A minimum MQPA of
2.00 is required to graduate.
The Management major prepares graduates for the modern challenges facing managers
in many types of organizations. These include, but are not limited to, for-profit, not-forprofit, and governmental organizations of any size. Graduates pursue careers a variety of
organizational contexts including retail, consulting, financial services, manufacturing, arts
and entertainment and many more.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Marketing—67 hours
Business Core (33 hours):
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103,
110 or 111, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104 and Statistics 131.
Math/Economics Courses (10 hours):
Economics 101, 102; Mathematics 141 or 161.
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261.
Marketing Major Core (12 hours):
Marketing 315, 411, 415, and 419.
Marketing Major Electives (12 hours):
Choose four courses from International Business 416, 417, Marketing 316, 328, 330,
412, 416, 417, 420, 426, 468, 480, or Marketing 390 with department chair approval.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 225

Courses that count in the Marketing major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE 105), “INBS”,
“MARK”, “MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106) prefix, and STAT 131. A minimum MQPA of
2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Supply Chain
Management—67 hours
Business Core (33 hours):
Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; International Business 205; Management 103,
110 or 111, 214, 303, 486; Marketing 104 and Statistics 131.
Math/Economics Courses (10 hours):
Economics 101, 102; and Mathematics 141 or 161.
Mathematics 141 prepares students in the business applications of calculus, but
Mathematics 161 must be taken as a prerequisite for Mathematics 162 and 261.
Supply Chain Major Core (15 hours):
Management 204, 210, 311, 424, and International Business 417.
Supply Chain Electives (9 hours):
Choose 9 hours from the following courses: Finance 440, INBS 445, Statistics
132, Management 302, 307, 443, 450, and 480 (internship must have Supply Chain as
primary role).
Courses that count in the Supply Chain Management major quality point average
(MQPA):
All courses with “ACCT”, “ENTR”, “FNCE” (excluding FNCE 105), “INBS”,
“MARK”, “MNGT” (excluding MNGT 106) prefix, and STAT 131, 132. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Marketing is the broad link between organizations and the marketplace. Every
organization must understand both customers and competitors in order to survive.
Accordingly, marketing as a discipline comprises diverse career paths, including marketing
management, marketing communication, design, customer experience, digital marketing,
logistics, sales, and market intelligence. Students who major in Marketing and wish to
further specialize are encouraged to consider adding a related minor (or taking additional
courses) in design, sales, analytics, digital marketing, entrepreneurship or communication.
Writing, Speaking and Information Literacy Intensive Courses
It is essential for students majoring in the Department of Management and Marketing
to possess strong writing, speaking, and information literacy (knowing how to locate,
analyze, and use information in decision-making) skills in preparation for careers in
business/accounting or graduate studies. The curriculum requirements specifically designed
to develop these skills include Management 214, Business, Ethics, and Society and
Management 486, Business Policy and Strategy. Please see course descriptions that follow
for more information.
Course Sequencing for the Business Core
For all majors within the Department of Management and Marketing, the following
business core courses applicable to the major must be completed before the beginning of
the junior year and prior to registering for any 400-level course in the Department:
Accounting 201, 202; Management 103, 110 or 111, 214; Statistics 131; Marketing 104;

226 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Economics 101, 102; and Mathematics 141 or 161. International Business 205 and Finance
301 must be taken before the beginning of the senior year.
Course Requirements for a minor in Business (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-Business Program majors only)
A minor in Business shall consist of Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; Management
103; Marketing 104; Statistics 131.
Course Requirements for a minor in Business Analysis (18 hours)
A minor in Business Analysis shall consist of Statistics 131 and 132; Management 210;
Computer Science 141; and six hours from Management 204, 307, or Computer Science
220 or 244.
Course Requirements for a minor in Digital Marketing (18 hours)
A minor in Digital Marketing shall consist of Marketing 104, 315, 328, 330;
Entrepreneurship 309; and three hours from Management 325, Entrepreneurship 470, or
Marketing 480. Note: Students wishing to receive credit for Marketing 480 – Internship in
Digital Marketing – and internship credit toward a Marketing major elective may not use
the same internship experience to count for both. Rather, two separate internships must be
completed, usually in the summers following the sophomore and junior years.
Course Requirements for a minor in Human Resource Management (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-Human Resource Management and non-Management majors only)
A minor in Human Resource Management shall consist of Management 103, 433, 457,
458, 462, and 465
Course Requirements for a minor in International Business (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-International Business majors only)
A minor in International Business shall consist of International Business 205, 445; six
hours of 200-level or higher foreign language courses; and two courses from International
Business 416, 417, Economics 206, 303, 390, or Entrepreneurship 307.
Course Requirements for a minor in Management (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-Management majors only)
A minor in Management shall consist of Management 103, 457, 475; and three courses
from Management 302, 304, 307, 325, 424, 433, 450, 458, 464, 465, or 480.
Course Requirements for a minor in Marketing (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-Marketing majors only)
A minor in Marketing shall consist of Marketing 104, 315, 411, 415, 419; and one
course from Marketing 316, 412, 417, 420, or 480.
Course Requirements for a minor in Sales (18 hours)
A minor in Sales shall consist of Marketing 104, 316, 416; Management 311; and six
hours from Management 213, 307; Communication Arts 104; Marketing 412, or 480. Note:
Students wishing to receive credit for Marketing 480 – Internship in Sales – and internship
credit toward a Marketing major elective may not use the same internship experience to
count for both. Rather, two separate internships must be completed, usually in the summers
following the sophomore and junior years.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 227

Course Requirements for a minor in Sports Management (18 hours)
(Restricted to non-Management majors only)
A minor in Sports Management shall consist of Management 103, 213, 313, 480 (3 cr);
and seven additional hours from Exercise Science 201, 220, 235, 305; Marketing 316, 420;
Management 307, 311, 325, or 433.
Course Requirements for a minor in Supply Chain Management (18 hours)
A minor in Supply Chain Management shall consist of Management 204, 424,
International Business 417, and three courses from: Finance 440, International Business
445, Management 302, 307, 310, 311, 433, 450, or 480 (internship must have Supply Chain
as primary role).
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

International Business (INBS)
INBS 205. GLOBAL BUSINESS ISSUES. Designed to acquaint the student with the
dynamic environment in which businesses must operate globally, including the challenges
posed by political risk, cultural barriers, and differences in economic and legal systems, as
well as those aspects of international business management not associated with traditional
functional areas including international trade; foreign currency transactions; theory and
institutions; country analysis; and international business strategy. Prerequisites: Sophomore
standing or instructor permission.
Semester course, three hours.
INBS 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
international business. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
INBS 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in international business. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
INBS 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
international business. Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department
chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
INBS 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in international business. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
INBS 390. STUDIES IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS. Studies in areas of
international business not fully covered by regular departmental offerings.
Semester course, three hours.
INBS 408. SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP PRACTICUM. Using case studies,
lectures, and hands-on exercises, this course clarifies and illustrates the steps necessary to
prepare to launch a social enterprise. Topics include the idea generation, business models,
organizational structure, staffing, governance, funding, and measurement of social impact.
Over the course of the semester, students will prepare business plans for their own social
enterprises. Students may only receive credit for only one of International Business 408 or
Entrepreneurship 408.
Semester course, three hours.
INBS 416. INTERNATIONAL MARKETING. An introduction to marketing
management on a global scale including social and cultural dimensions of marketing;

228 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

economic environments; political and financial risks; cross-cultural consumer behavior; and
international product and channel decisions. Prerequisite: International Business 205.
Semester course, three hours.
INBS 417. GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS. An understanding of supply chains is essential
to the global marketplace including social and cultural dimensions of business practices in
international economies; international logistics; political and financial risks; cross-cultural
vendor interactions; and international product and channel decisions. This course will
examine international supply chains and how various functional organizations including
Marketing, Finance, Human Resources must interact with global supply chains in order to
meet their business objectives.
Three hours
INBS 445. INTERNATIONAL TRADE. This course surveys policies and international
business practices of international trade, including coverage of international logistics,
customs and tariffs, export control law, international contracts, resolution of trade disputes,
and international trade organizations. Prerequisite: International Business 205.
Semester course, three hours.
INBS 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
international business. Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department
chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
INBS 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research
in international business. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
INBS 480. INTERNSHIP IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS. This is an opportunity for
students to participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an
employer and a Management and Marketing Department faculty member. Most internships
take place during the summer months. Students will be graded based on an employer
performance evaluation along with a written paper and journal. Prerequisites: Good
academic standing and completion of the freshman year of study.
Semester course, one to six hours.

Management (MNGT)
MNGT 103. PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT. An introduction to the theory and
practice of management. Students are introduced to management history, ethics, global
issues, and other challenges. The four basic managerial functions of planning, organizing,
leading, and controlling are explored in detail. Throughout, attention is given to a Christian
perspective on these topics.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 106. FUNDAMENTALS OF BUSINESS. A general introduction to the
organizational environment and operations of contemporary businesses. The course
examines the United States business system and how it interacts with global systems; the
basic management functions of planning, organizing, leading, and controlling;
entrepreneurship and small businesses; marketing processes and consumer behavior;
managing operations and information; and financial management. Integrated into these
topics are Christian principles that should guide ethical business practices.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 110. EXCEL. Nearly all businesses require new hires to be proficient in Excel.
Students will learn how to use Excel in a variety of business fields. This course culminates

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 229

in a final exam that, if successful, will result in students achieving Microsoft certification in
Excel. An additional fee is charged for this course.
Online only, three hours.
MNGT 111. BUSINESS COMPUTER APPLICATIONS. This course provides business
majors with instruction and practical exercises using Microsoft Office to solve business
problems. It integrates applications of Microsoft Office into the business environment in
such a way that students learn to use the software to prepare reports, design oral
presentations, collaborate with one another, and utilize spreadsheets to organize information
and summarize data. Business, accounting, financial and scientific problems and
applications are emphasized. This course must be taken in the freshman or sophomore year.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 120. ADVANCED EXCEL. Nearly all businesses require new hires to be
proficient in business uses of Excel. Students will build on the Excel knowledge acquired
in Management 110 and demonstrate advanced proficiency. Students will utilize advanced
techniques in Excel (macros, nested functions, PivotTables, and PivotCharts, for example)
to answer real-world organizational questions. This course culminates in a final exam that,
if successful, will result in students achieving the Microsoft Expert certification in Excel.
Prerequisite: Management 110 or MOS Basic Excel Certification. An additional fee is
charged for this course.
Online only, three hours.
MNGT 204. OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT. Introduction to the design, planning,
control and improvement of business operations for both goods-producing and servicerendering organizations. Organizational and management impacts resulting from product
development, process management, and supply chain management is explored in detail.
Prerequisite: Management 202.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 210. DATA VISUALIZATION. This course will study techniques for creating
effective visual stories via dashboards. Topics include visual story telling models,
exploratory data analysis, visualization software, interaction techniques, graphical
perception, color, animation, dimensional data, temporal visualization, and text
visualization. Prerequisite: Management 103 and 201.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 213 PRINCIPLES OF SPORTS MANAGEMENT AND MARKETING. This
course explores the basic concepts and principles of the sport and recreation business.
Emphases will be on the principles of management, marketing, finance, and economics
applied to sports management and marketing. Topics include event and venue management,
legal considerations, sales, promotion, revenue generation, branding, and public relations.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 214. BUSINESS, ETHICS, AND SOCIETY. An examination of various ethical
and moral issues arising in contemporary business and its activities which affect our society
and the world. This course also examines the nature and purpose of economic life and
contemporary business, especially from the Christian perspective. This course satisfies the
Writing Intensive (WI) and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for all business majors.
Prerequisite: Sophomore standing and Business Program majors only.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized management
topics. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

230 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

MNGT 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
management-related research. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MNGT 302. LEAN MANAGEMENT. An examination of the general theory of lean
management and the twenty keys to workplace improvement. Topics include just-in-time,
supplier development, and skill versatility. Students completing this course may choose to
sit for a (fee based) Lean Six Sigma certification exam.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 303. BUSINESS LAW. A survey of law crucial to the conduct of business,
including an introduction to the nature of law, legal reasoning, and dispute resolution as
well as to the law of contracts, torts, crimes, agency, business associations, and intellectual
property. Students may not receive credit for both Management 303 and Entrepreneurship
303.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 304. LEGAL ENVIRONMENT OF BUSINESS. Managers need to be prepared
to understand and navigate the complex world of federal and state regulation on topics such
as employment law, antitrust law, environmental law, consumer protection law, internet
law, intellectual property law, and securities law. This course not only provides a thorough
consideration of the applicable law, but also addresses the ethical principles, fundamental
values, and policy issues relevant to each topic. Prerequisite: Management 303 or
Entrepreneurship 303.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 307. PROJECT TEAMS AND LEADERSHIP. This course provides the student
with team-building skills, team dynamics, and project management skills in alignment with
prevailing project management methodology. Students completing this course may choose
to sit for a (fee based) CAPM certification exam offered through PMI. Prerequisite:
Sophomore standing.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 311. NEGOTIATION. Negotiation is the art and science of securing agreements
between two or more parties who are interdependent and who are seeking to maximize their
outcomes. The central issues of this course deal with understanding the behavior of
individuals, groups, and organizations in the context of competitive situations. It is designed
to complement the technical and diagnostic skills learned in other courses, with a basic
premise being that while a manager needs analytical skills to discover optimal solutions to
problems, a broad array of negotiation skills is needed for these solutions to be accepted and
implemented. Considerable emphasis will be placed on simulations, role-playing, and cases.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 313 SPORT AND EVENT MANAGEMENT PRACTICUM. This course is
designed to introduce students to the logistics of sport event and venue management.
Student will obtain hands on experience in planning, organizing, marketing, managing risk,
managing facilities, working with stakeholders, and other related activities in the course of
administering an actual sporting event. Prerequisites: Management 213 and junior standing.
Semester course, two hours.
MNGT 323. ADVANCED BUSINESS LAW. Exploration of advanced legal topics
important for business and accounting including negotiable instruments; agency; secured
transactions and creditors’ rights; bankruptcy; forms of business associations; securities
law; and real property. Prerequisite: Management 303.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 324. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE MUSIC BUSINESS. This course is designed
to analyze the most important legal issues in the contemporary music industry, including

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 231

how these issues began, how they have evolved, and where they are headed. Students will
explore copyright law, including fair use and public domain, and how it affects sampling,
interpolation, and mashups. The course will explore contracts related to songwriting, 360°
deals, revenue sharing, and more, in addition to legal documents related to bands, booking,
and touring. Students will also explore contemporary and new means of creating and
disseminating music, including streaming audio/video and augmented/virtual reality, and
explore associated legal implications. Students may only receive credit for one of ENTR
324, MNGT 324, or MUSI 324.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MNGT 325. MANAGERIAL PERSPECTIVES IN BUSINESS ANALYSIS. This
course focuses on developing a managerial understanding of the strategic role data can play
in a cross-functional organization. Using lecture, case analysis, and hands-on exercises, this
course will prepare students for entry into a data driven business world by highlighting
fundamental analytical tools, outlining how technology enables and empowers business
decision making, and by exploring cutting edge trends in business analytics and decision
making. Additionally, legal and ethical issues raised by a data-driven business world will
be discussed from a Christian perspective. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. Prerequisite:
Sophomore standing.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 326. INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS OF MUSIC. This course is
designed as an introduction to the business of music, providing students with the latest
instruction on best practices for music creators, consumers, and facilitators working in this
field. Students will have the opportunity to learn the fundamental principles involved in the
entrepreneurial and legal dimensions of the music business, exploring the structural and
functional components of this ever-changing and rapidly growing industry. Particular
attention will be given to the challenges of starting, growing and managing a music business
in the digital era. Students may only receive credit for one of Entrepreneurship 326,
Management 326, or Music 326.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized management
topics. Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MNGT 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
management-related research. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MNGT 390. STUDIES IN MANAGEMENT. Studies in areas of management not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 424. SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT. The focus of this course is to provide
an introduction to supply chain management. It will deal with both the logistical activities
of demand fulfillment and the behavioral aspects of supply chain management. Experiential
learning will take place within a simulation called, “Fundamentals of Supply Chain
Management.” This course will provide considerable insight into the management of supply
chains. Students will develop disciplines and a knowledge of best practices that will
facilitate their success in a world where demand and supply integration is one of the
cornerstones of modern business. Students may not receive credit for both Management 424
and Entrepreneurship 424.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 433. RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE. An introduction to and study
of risk and liability exposures that face businesses and individuals. Topics include risk

232 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

management techniques, the insurance industry, and employee benefits packages.
Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 450. QUALITY MANAGEMENT. An examination of the philosophies,
principles, and techniques used to study, gain control, and improve processes. Topics
include the thought leaders, Six Sigma, tools of QC, designed experiments, and the Baldrige
Award criteria. Prerequisite: Management 201 or equivalent. Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 457. HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT. This course examines the
principles, policies and practices of human resources important for being an effective
manager in today’s organizations. Human resource topics include EEOC and legal
guidelines, recruitment, selection, training, compensation, employee appraisal, and
discipline systems. Prerequisite: Management 103 and junior or senior standing.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 458. ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR. An examination of individual,
interpersonal, and organizational processes in contemporary organizations emphasizing
motivation, job design, performance management, group and team dynamics, leadership,
and decision-making. Also covered are organizational culture, design, and change
management. The course emphasizes contemporary theories and trends in organizational
structures and processes. The course includes extensive use of case studies and applications
of theories to management practice. Prerequisite: Management 103.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized management
topics. Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MNGT 462. EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS. This course covers the
breadth and depth of issues related to the professional management of employee benefits
and compensation systems. Human resource policies and practices will be discussed.
Applicable law, regulation, and case law will be covered. Specific topics include retirement
plans, health coverage, paid time off, salary and hourly pay systems, and additional
incentive practices. Prerequisite: Management 457.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 465. ADVANCED HUMAN RESOURCES. This course provides an in-depth
examination of advance topics in human resource management. Emphasized topics include
labor relations and collective bargaining, recruitment and retention strategies, employee
selection, performance appraisal, and legal issues. Taught as a seminar course. Prerequisite:
Management 457.
Semester course, three hours.
MNGT 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
management-related research. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MNGT 475. LEADERSHIP. A study of historical and current perspectives on leadership
theory and practice with the incorporation of Christian principles. Leadership theories are
made practical through lectures, class activities, case studies, guest speakers, and
assignments. Students will learn more about their strengths through assessments and selfreflection. The course is treated as a seminar, and thus focused on discussion and many
student-led activities. Prerequisites: Management 103 and junior or senior standing; or
instructor permission.
Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 233

MNGT 478. SEMINAR IN LIFE MANAGEMENT. This seminar is intended to provide
senior students with practical advice for navigating the transition to post-college life.
Finances, risk, health, professional responsibilities and interpersonal relationships are
important aspects of life that need to be managed. These and other related topics will be
addressed in the seminar.
Senior Standing, one hour.
MNGT 480. INTERNSHIP IN MANAGEMENT. This is an opportunity for students to
participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer
and a Management and Marketing Department faculty member. Most internships take place
during the summer months. Students will be graded based on an employer performance
evaluation along with a written paper and journal. Prerequisites: Good academic standing
and completion of the freshman year of study.
Semester course, one to six hours.
MNGT 486. BUSINESS POLICY AND STRATEGY. This course presents the basic
concepts and tools used in strategic business analysis and applies those concepts and tools
to the formulation, implementation, and evaluation of organizational business strategy. This
course also represents the Grove City College Business program’s capstone course. As such
it will integrate the knowledge and skills gained across previous business coursework and
help the student to form a total business perspective, including the application of Christian
values in the workplace. This course satisfies the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement in the
Business Program. Prerequisite: Senior status; majoring in the Departments of Accounting
& Finance and/or Management and Marketing.
Semester course, three hours.

Marketing (MARK)
MARK 104. PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING. An introduction to the terms and concepts
used in marketing. Study focuses on all aspects of the marketing process, including market
analysis and information, consumer and business buying behavior, marketing strategy, the
marketing mix, and legal and ethical issues. Discussion covers global, digital, and
sustainability implications. The goal is to understand key basic marketing concepts and be
able to practically apply knowledge to marketing decisions. Discussion also incorporates
the application of Christian values in the workplace.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized marketing topics.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MARK 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
marketing research. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MARK 315. DIGITAL MARKETING. This course provides an in-depth study of the
rapidly growing and evolving area of digital marketing. In addition to understanding the
basic components of digital marketing, students will focus on learning how specific
elements of digital marketing, including websites, social media, and mobile technology can
be utilized as integrated parts of a comprehensive marketing plan. Lecture, case studies,
guest speakers, and in-class exercises will be utilized to provide understanding and
relevancy of this key component within the marketing discipline. In addition, students will
also explore ethical issues related to marketing in a digital world from a Christian
perspective. Prerequisite: Marketing 104.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 316. SALES. This course focuses on professional selling from a client-focused,
non-manipulative sales perspective. Students will learn and apply the principles of
professional selling and the role of sales management through lecture, access to guest

234 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

speakers in the sales discipline, and hands-on activities. Students will also explore ethical
issues found in the sales discipline from a Christian perspective. Prerequisite: Marketing
104.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 328. CONTENT MARKETING. Students will probe the subject of content
marketing as a core discipline for 21st century entrepreneurs. They will learn essential
concepts for strategic content development and web-based thought leadership and will
acquire skills for use with practical web applications. Students will engage in a semesterlong project using WordPress to publish Internet content for a company or organization,
employing techniques learned in a class. The structure of the class will include two teaching
sessions per week and a WordPress lab. Students may not receive credit for both Marketing
328 and Entrepreneurship 328.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 330. SEARCH ENGINE OPTIMIZATION. Students will explore the
fundamental principles and best practices in the field of search engine optimization. They
will learn and develop the essential knowledge and skills required to achieve favorable
organic rank in the most important search engines and will become familiar with and interact
with experts in the industry. Case studies and actual business scenarios will be examined in
detail. Students will have opportunity to conduct SEO research for small businesses and
non-profit organizations in semester-long team projects with other students. Students may
not receive credit for both Marketing 330 and Entrepreneurship 330.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized marketing topics.
Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MARK 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
marketing research. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MARK 390. STUDIES IN MARKETING. Studies in areas of marketing not fully covered
by regular departmental offerings.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 411. MARKETING RESEARCH. An introduction to the major areas of
marketing research and information from a managerial perspective. Students will learn how
to determine when and what type of market research to do, what objectives to pursue, and
how to assess market research learnings. Incorporating market research within the context
of market information, this course explores problem definition, research design,
questionnaire development, sampling, interviewing, analysis, and reporting. It incorporates
key ethical issues and application of Christian values in the workplace. Prerequisites:
Management 201, Marketing 104, and senior standing.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 412. RETAIL MANAGEMENT. An in-depth look at the dynamic field of retail
marketing. A balanced blend of theory and application (using current examples) will help
students learn how to analyze and develop effective retailing strategies. Emphasized topics
include buying, merchandising, and selling functions; inventory, financial, and employee
management; and targeting, location and promotion objectives. Study also investigates
inherent ethical issues and discusses how Christian principles can be applied. Prerequisite:
Marketing 104 and junior or senior standing.
Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 235

MARK 415. STRATEGIC MARKETING. This capstone marketing course utilizes
business course work to date and enables students to demonstrate strategic marketing
mastery and business application in three critical areas: 1) role of marketing in the
development of successful strategies, 2) marketing opportunity analysis, and 3) developing,
implementing, and managing strategic marketing programs. It applies marketing principles
to real world situations through case study analysis and/or project applications, discussions,
presentations, and exposure to business professionals. While focused on marketing,
discussion will incorporate financial and management strategies. It also incorporates key
ethical issues and application of Christian values in the workplace. Prerequisite: Marketing
104 and senior standing.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 416. SALES MANAGEMENT. This course is focused on the principles, methods,
and issues found in professional, business-to-business sales force management. Students
will gain exposure to and experience with the responsibilities of a sales manager and an
understanding of the strategic role played by sales within an organization. Prerequisite:
Marketing 316.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MARK 417. NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT. This course
encompasses a comprehensive study of the new product development and management
process. It is intended for students who are interested in learning how new products and
services are developed and managed. Since New Product Development is a cross functional
discipline, the content is relevant for students preparing to lead an organization to
understand customer needs, to innovate and translate those needs to new products and
services, and to profitably grow a business. It incorporates case study analysis and/or project
applications, discussions, presentations, and exposure to business professionals. Discussion
incorporates key ethical issues and the application of Christian values in the workplace.
Prerequisite: Marketing 104.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 419. CONSUMER BEHAVIOR. An examination of consumer decision-making
in the marketplace, emphasizing the effects of internal factors such as motivation,
personality, learning, emotion, and attitudes; external factors such as culture, subcultures,
reference groups, demographics, and social status; and the steps in the consumer decisionmaking process. The course incorporates an examination of what it means to be both a
Christian and a consumer. Prerequisite: Marketing 104 and junior or senior standing.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 420. ADVERTISING. A critical exploration of the purposes and functions of
advertising, public relations and sales promotion in the growth and development of the
global market economy. Study focuses on the basic principles of researching, creating, and
executing promotional campaigns, and includes an examination of corporate responsibility
and Christian ethics in advertising. Prerequisite: Marketing 104 and junior or senior
standing.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 426. MUSIC MARKETING. This course will provide students with an overview
of key music marketing principles, terms, and practices, which together form the foundation
for all music marketing plans. Students will dig into the key areas of opportunities for
musicians, including publicity, advertising, promotion (online and traditional), digital
distribution, touring, licensing/synch, and radio. Students will learn what companies and
partners to work with to reach their core fans, how to communicate with them, and the ways
to leverage the changes and new opportunities that the internet offers to marketers. In
addition, they will learn marketing ideas to help them describe their vision, identify a market
need, analyze an artist’s fan base, learn from their competitors, set marketing plan goals,

236 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

and find the perfect mix of new marketing strategies ranging from branding, product, price,
place, promotion, and marketing information systems. Students may only receive credit for
one of Entrepreneurship 426, Marketing 426, or Music 426. Prerequisite: Marketing 104.
Semester course, three hours.
MARK 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized marketing topics.
Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MARK 468. INNOVATION FOR IMPACT. Innovation and creativity are widely
recognized as drivers of success in today’s world for both individuals and organizations.
Whether entities are nonprofits, startups, small companies, large companies, or
governmental units, they are all looking to employ people who understand innovation. This
course will provide students with an understanding of how different entities can innovate
using design thinking methodology. As we explore how to innovate in concept, we will use
that knowledge to attack problems faced by real organizations in our own community to
explore how applying design thinking methodologies can have true impact on real-world
organizations. Students will emerge from this course with a toolbox of innovation
techniques, real project work that they can use as examples of their practice of those
techniques, and the confidence that they are creative and innovative people. Students may
not receive credit for both Marketing 468 and Entrepreneurship 468.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MARK 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
marketing research. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MARK 480. INTERNSHIP IN MARKETING. This is an opportunity for students to
participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer
and a Management and Marketing Department faculty member. Most internships take place
during the summer months. Students will be graded based on an employer performance
evaluation along with a written paper and journal. Prerequisites: Good academic standing
and completion of the freshman year of study.
Semester course, one to six hours.

Mathematics
Dr. Jackson, Chair; Dr. Bancroft, Dr. Bonomo, Dr. Drai, Dr. Flanders, Dr. McIntyre, Dr.
E. Smith, Dr. Thompson.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics—42-47 hours
Math Core Requirements (23 or 24 hours):
Mathematics 125, 162, 210 or 213, 222, 261, 421, 465, and 488.
Math Electives (12 hours):
Choose three courses from Mathematics 303, 365, 422, 466, or 467, Statistics 331,
332. At least one course must be Statistics 332, Mathematics 422, 466, or 467.
Choose one additional course from Mathematics 232, 262, 303, 365, 422, 466, and
467, Statistics 331, 332
Major-Related Requirements (7 or 11 hours):
Computer Science 141; Physics 101, or Physics 121 and 122.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 237

Courses that count in the Mathematics major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “MATH” prefix, with the exception of Mathematics 110, 111, 118,
119, 141, 151, 152, 201, 237, and 240. MQPA also includes Statistics 331 and 332. A
minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics and Secondary
Education Certification—85-90 hours
This program fulfills the requirements of the full mathematics major and the
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for secondary mathematics
certification.
Math Core Requirements (32 or 33 hours):
Mathematics 125, 162, 210 or 213, 222, 240, 261, 303, , 421, 465, 488 and Statistics
331.
Math Electives (3 hours):
Choose one courses from Statistics 332;Mathematics 422, 466, and 467.
Major-Related Requirements (7 or 11 hours):
Computer Science 141; Physics 101, or Physics 121 and 122.
Education requirements (40 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Courses that count in the Mathematics and Secondary Education Certification major
quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “MATH” prefix, with the exception of Mathematics 110, 111, 118,
119, 141, 151, 152, 201, 237. MQPA also includes Statistics 331 and 332. Mathematics
Secondary Education Certification majors must have a minimum MQPA of 2.75 in all
Mathematics courses excluding Mathematics 110, 111, 118, 119, 141, 151, 152, 201, and
237.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for
additional details on teacher certification requirements.
Every graduating mathematics major will receive a thorough introduction to
mathematical ideas as well as to problem solving skills and strategies. Moreover, every
graduate should be able to communicate technical ideas, both orally and through the use of
a written document and should also have an established ability to learn how to use a
computer algebra system in particular and other library and electronic resources in general
in order to generate, locate, evaluate, and use information. To this end, mathematics majors
receive instruction in the use of Mathematica in the calculus sequence (Mathematics 161,
162, and 261) and also acquire a working knowledge of a computer program in Computer
Science 141. They also gain experience in researching and presenting results, both orally
and through writing a substantial technical paper, in Mathematics 488 Seminar of
Mathematics. This collection of courses serves to satisfy the Writing Intensive, Speaking
Intensive, and Information Literacy requirements within the major.

238 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Course requirements for a concentration in Actuarial Science (55 hours)
Students majoring in Mathematics can also earn a concentration in Actuarial Science
by completing Mathematics 306, Statistics 331, 332, and two of Mathematics 232, 262, 303,
365, 422, 466, or 467 with one course being at the 300-400 level for their math electives;
Accounting 201; Finance 301; Finance 332 or 334; and Management 433. Students must
also write a paper on probability or statistics in Mathematics 488. Students are also
encouraged to take additional courses from Economics 101, 102, 302, and 442. The
Mathematics 306 requirement is waived for students who pass the first actuarial exam on
their own.
Course Requirements for a minor in Mathematics (22-23 hours)
A minor in Mathematics will consist of 22 hours, including Mathematics 210 or 213,
and 222 but excluding Mathematics 110, 111, 118, 119, 125, 151, 152, 201, 237, 240, 305,
306, and 307.
Students interested in graduate school in mathematics are specifically advised to take
Mathematics 365, 422, 466, and 467.
Students who are enrolled in College Algebra, Pre-Calculus, or one of the calculus
courses and determine that they are not properly placed may change to another course within
the pre-calculus/calculus sequence on or before the sixteenth class meeting (twelfth class
meeting if currently in College Algebra or Pre-Calculus). The student must have the
approval of the current instructor and the instructor of the course to which the student
intends to move. The student must complete and return an Add/Drop Form to the Registrar’s
Office. Note: A student may repeat a course in which he/she previously earned a grade of
‘C-’ or lower. A student who passes a course with a ‘C’ grade or higher may not later repeat
the same class for credit or audit unless the course is designated as repeatable for multiple
credits.
College Math Courses Taken in High School
Transfer credit may be awarded for mathematics courses that are equivalent or
comparable to those offered by the Grove City College Department of Mathematics and
completed with a grade of “C” or better. Any such courses taken before entering Grove City
College must be listed in the catalog of the college of transfer as courses offered for degree
credit to that college’s undergraduates, must be taken in a classroom setting where most of
the students are college undergraduates, and must be organized and taught by college
faculty.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Mathematics (MATH)
MATH 110. COLLEGE ALGEBRA. Designed to help prepare students for success
specifically in Business Calculus as well as in Pre-Calculus, this course offers a thorough
treatment of linear and quadratic equations and inequalities, rational and radical equations,
and functions and their graphs. A basic understanding of high school algebra is presumed.
This course does not satisfy the Quantitative/Logical Reasoning requirement.
Semester course, three hours.
MATH 111. PRE-CALCULUS. Designed to help prepare students for success in Physics
121 or Calculus I, this course offers a thorough treatment of function theory, analytic
geometry, exponential and logarithmic functions, and trigonometry. A basic understanding
of high school algebra and analytic geometry is presumed. Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 239

MATH 118. FINITE MATHEMATICS. An introduction to a variety of topics from finite
mathematics such as sets, counting, basic probability and statistics, linear systems, matrix
algebra, and linear programming (graphical solutions). Time permitting, additional topics
such as linear programming with the simplex method, Markov chains, and game theory will
be considered.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MATH 119. TOPICS IN CONTEMPORARY MATHEMATICS. This course will
consist of a survey of a number of mathematical ideas on an introductory level. Topics may
include graph theory, symmetry, sequences, fractals, fair-division algorithms,
apportionment, financial math, and voting theory.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MATH 125. MATHEMATICAL COMPUTING. This course serves as an introduction
into the mathematics major and to thinking mathematically. The path to this thinking
includes basic programming and looking at mathematical proof. Topics will include
Euclidean algorithm, prime numbers, Fibonacci numbers, and polynomials.
Fall Semester only, three hours.
MATH 141. BUSINESS CALCULUS. The differential and integral calculus of elementary
functions with applications in business and economics. Students may not receive credit for
both Mathematics 141 and 161. Mathematics 161, not 141, is the prerequisite for 162.
Semester course, four hours.
MATH 151. SURVEY OF MATHEMATICS I. This course (along with Math 152) is a
conceptual exploration of mathematical topics related to elementary and middle school
mathematics, and is part of a two-course, six-hour mathematics requirement specifically
designed for elementary education and early childhood majors. Content studied includes
critical thinking and problem solving, logic, sets, relations and functions, numeration
systems and whole-number computation, integers, and elementary number theory.
Restricted to Elementary, Special Education with Elementary, Middle Level, and Music
Education majors only.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MATH 152. SURVEY OF MATHEMATICS II. This course continues the exploration of
selected topics from the elementary and middle school mathematics curriculum, including
rational and real numbers, probability, statistics, geometry, and measurement. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 151 or permission of instructor.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MATH 161. CALCULUS I. A first course in calculus that assumes no prior study of the
subject. Topics include limits and continuity, differentiation, curve sketching, the
fundamental theorem of calculus, definite and indefinite integrals, and applications. This
course fulfills in part the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the Mathematics major.
Prerequisite: High school mathematics including algebra, analytic geometry, and
trigonometry. Students may not receive credit for both Mathematics 141 and 161.
Semester course, four hours.
MATH 162. CALCULUS II. A continuation of Math 161 covering the topics: exponential,
logarithmic and inverse trigonometric functions, techniques of integration, parametric
equations, sequences, infinite series, and Taylor series. This course fulfills in part the
Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the Mathematics major. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 161 or permission of instructor.
Semester course, four hours.
MATH 210. COMBINATORICS. A study of the foundations of mathematics in the
context of combinatorial analysis with an emphasis on mathematical writing. Representative
topics include set theory, functions, proof techniques, induction, enumeration techniques,

240 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

the pigeon-hole principle, binomial and multinomial coefficients, the principle of inclusionexclusion, and generating functions. Corequisite: Mathematics 162.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MATH 213. DISCRETE MATHEMATICS FOR COMPUTER SCIENCE. A study of
the foundations of mathematics with an emphasis on concepts related to theoretical
mathematical methods and computer science. Topics include mathematical logic, set theory,
algorithms, complexity of algorithms, integers, a variety of proof techniques, combinatorics,
relations, graphs and digraphs, and trees. Corequisite: Mathematics 162.
Fall semester only, four hours.
MATH 214. APPLIED PROBABILITY AND LINEAR ALGEBRA. An overview of
probability and linear algebra, with an emphasis on applications and concepts for computer
science. Topics include probability distributions, counting, conditional probability, matrix
operations, vector properties, change of bases, Markov chains, and eigenvalues and
eigenvectors. Students will not be permitted to receive credit for all three of Mathematics
214, 222, and Statistics 331. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.
Spring semester only, four hours.
MATH 222. LINEAR ALGEBRA. A study of the theory of matrices and their applications
including systems of linear equations, determinants, vector spaces, eigenvalues and
eigenvectors, linear transformations, diagonalization, and Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.
Spring semester only, four hours.
MATH 230. SURVEY OF MATHEMATICS III. This course explores the mathematical
topics that form the grades 5-8 curriculum, including ratios and proportions, algebra,
relations and functions, geometry, statistics, and probability. Prerequisite: Mathematics 152
or permission of instructor.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
MATH 232. FINANCIAL MATHEMATICS. This is an introduction to interest theory
and the mathematics of investment. The topics include interest rates, valuation of annuities,
loan repayment, valuation of bonds, rates of return, term structure, and cash-flow duration
and immunization. This course is intended to prepare students for the actuarial exam FM/2.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 141 and Accounting 201. Corequisite: Finance 301.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MATH 237. TOPICS FOR MATH EDUCATION. This course will be taught in an
independent format covering mathematical material useful for math education majors.
Students may only receive credit for this course once. Prerequisite: Mathematics 151 or 152,
or permission of instructor.
Semester course, one hour.
MATH 240. MATHEMATICS FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION. A course designed
for the secondary teacher candidate in mathematics. Topics covered are history of
mathematics; logic; graph theory; proportional reasoning; problem solving and critical
thinking; geometry; algebra and functions; and other material applicable to secondary
teachers of mathematics. Required for mathematics secondary education majors. Open to
elementary and middle level education majors with mathematics concentration.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 210, 213, 222, or corequisite with Mathematics 222.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MATH 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
mathematics. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 241

MATH 261. CALCULUS III. The final course in the three-semester calculus sequence
covering: polar coordinates, vectors and the geometry of three-dimensional space, vector
functions, partial derivatives, multiple integrals and vector calculus. This course fulfills in
part the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the Mathematics major. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 162.
Semester course, four hours.
MATH 262. DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. A study of the elementary theory and
methods for analytic solution of ordinary differential equations, with applications, including
first order equations, higher order linear equations, Laplace transform methods, and series
solutions (time permitting). Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MATH 263. NUMERICAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. The study and application
of numerical methods for solving differential equations including Euler’s method, RungeKutta methods, multi-step methods, and solutions of systems of equations.
Prerequisite/corequisite: Mathematics 262 or permission of the instructor.
Spring semester only, one hour.
MATH 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in mathematics. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MATH 303. COLLEGE GEOMETRY. This course explores various modern geometries
from an axiomatic point of view. Topics such as sets of axioms and finite geometries,
Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries, geometric transformations, and possibly neutral
geometry will be thoroughly examined. Prerequisite: Mathematics 210 or 213, and 222.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MATH 305. PUTNAM PROBLEM GROUP. The Putnam Exam is a national
undergraduate mathematics competition consisting of 12 challenging problems
administered on the first Saturday in December. The course will consist of meeting once a
week to work on problems and discuss problem solving strategies. Students not meeting
the prerequisite are invited to audit the course. Students may take the course up to four times
for credit. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.
Fall semester only, one hour.
MATH 306. ACTUARIAL MATHEMATICS. An in-depth study of calculus-based
probability and statistics topics covered by the Society of Actuaries first actuarial exam,
Exam P. Topics include general probability, univariate probability distributions, and
multivariate probability distributions with applications to risk and insurance. Students
taking this course are required to obtain the recommended review manual and to register for
and take Exam P. Students may take this course at most twice for credit. Corequisite:
Statistics 332 and instructor approval.
Spring semester only, one hour.
MATH 307. INVESTIGATIONS IN MATHEMATICS RESEARCH. An introduction
to mathematics research. Teams of two to four students will investigate mathematical
phenomena experimentally, detect patterns, create conjectures, and attempt to prove the
conjectures and verify the patterns. Students may take this course at most three times for
credit. Prerequisite: Mathematics 210 or 213.
Spring semester only, one hour.
MATH 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students,
with a minimum of eighteen hours in mathematics, to do intensive independent study of
specialized topics. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

242 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

MATH 365. COMPLEX VARIABLES. An introduction to the theory of functions of a
complex variable including complex numbers; analytic functions; derivatives and integrals
of functions of a complex variable; Taylor and Laurent series; and mappings by functions
of a complex variable. Prerequisite: Mathematics 261.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
MATH 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in mathematics. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MATH 390. STUDIES IN MATHEMATICS. A series of lectures/discussions on topics
from such areas as combinatorics, number theory, algebra, geometry, statistics, computer
applications, analysis, and topology. Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MATH 421. ABSTRACT ALGEBRA. An introduction to formal axiomatic systems and
the elementary theory of groups and rings. Prerequisite: Mathematics 210 or 213, and 222.
Semester course, three hours.
MATH 422. NUMBER THEORY. This course is, in part, an application of some of the
ideas encountered in Math 421. Various results from the theory of finite groups, particularly
results about the structure of finite cyclic groups, will be established and used to prove
classical results of elementary number theory. The course will also cover arithmetic
functions, the structure of Zn*, special numbers, and additional topics as time allows.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 421.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
MATH 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for junior and senior students,
with a minimum of eighteen hours in mathematics, to do intensive independent study of
specialized topics. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MATH 465. CLASSICAL ANALYSIS. This course is an introduction to real analysis and
includes a rigorous treatment of the structure of the real number system; sequences; limits;
continuity; uniform continuity; open and closed sets; compact sets; differentiation; the
Riemann integral; and possibly topics from infinite series; sequences and series of functions;
pointwise and uniform convergence; and possibly generalizations to n-dimensional or
metric spaces. Prerequisites: Mathematics 210 or 213, and Mathematics 261.
Semester course, three hours.
MATH 466. INTERMEDIATE ANALYSIS. A continuation of the study of real analysis
through rigorous treatment of material in several of the following areas: metric spaces and
continuity; multivariable calculus; convergence and completeness; measure theory; and
functional analysis. Prerequisites: Mathematics 222 and 465.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
MATH 467. TOPOLOGY. This course introduces students to point-set topology: a way
of generalizing ideas from geometry and analysis. Topics include basic set theory,
topological spaces, bases, metric spaces, continuity, connectedness, separation axioms,
convergence, compactness and metrizability. Prerequisites: Mathematics 222 and either
Mathematics 210 or 213.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 243

MATH 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in mathematics. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MATH 488. SEMINAR IN MATHEMATICS. A course for seniors that includes
independent reading and research, student presentations, preparation for the Graduate
Record Exam and Major Field Test and faculty lectures on advanced topics in mathematics.
This course, in part, satisfies the requirements for a Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking
Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) course for the mathematics major.
Prerequisite: Senior standing.
Semester course, two hours.
MATH 499. HONORS IN MATHEMATICS. A course available to junior and senior
students on an individual basis. Prerequisite: Consent of the department chair.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Statistics (STAT)
STAT 131. STATISTICAL METHODS I. An introduction to the basic methods and
techniques of statistical inference including probability distributions, descriptive statistics,
confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, and parametric and nonparametric hypothesis
testing. Students may only receive credit for either Statistics 131 or Psychology 201.
Semester course, three hours.
STAT 132. STATISTICAL METHODS II. The course builds on the material form
Statistical Methods I and covers techniques for creating effective predictive models. Topics
include simple regression models, multiple regression models, model building, model
analysis, time series and forecasting, and experimental design. Students will learn the basics
of statistical software and begin to understand some concepts behind machine learning.
Prerequisite: Statistics 131 or Psychology 201 and permission of instructor.
Semester course, three hours.
STAT 331. THEORY OF STATISTICS I. An introduction to probability and
mathematical statistics, including counting techniques; probability spaces; independence;
conditional probability; distributions of discrete and continuous random variables; expected
values, moments and moment-generating functions; random vectors and their distributions.
A computer algebra system is used. Corequisite: Mathematics 261 or permission of
instructor.
Fall semester only, three hours.
STAT 332. THEORY OF STATISTICS II. The continued study of mathematical
statistics including transformations of random variables and vectors; sampling distributions;
the Central Limit Theorem; properties of point estimates of parameters; maximumlikelihood estimates; confidence intervals; hypothesis testing; contingency tables; simple
and linear regression; and one-way analysis of variance. Statistical software and a computer
algebra system are used. Prerequisite: Statistics 331.
Spring semester only, three hours.
STAT 412. DATA ANALYSIS RESEARCH METHODS. This course examines the
fundamentals of research approaches and methods of statistical sciences. The course will
explore the entire research task including problem definition, literature review, experimental
design, data collection, analysis, and communication of conclusion. This course will have
the opportunity to culminate in basic research posters and presentations for local and/or
national conferences. Prerequisite: Statistics 132.
Semester course, three hours.
STAT 414. ADVANCED ANALYTICAL METHODS. This course will explore in detail
how to conduct non-linear analysis. Optimization techniques will focus on non-integer as

244 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

well as integerprogramming problems. Stochastic modeling techniques will be presented
by way of coding systems of non-normal distributions. Queueing theory will also be studied.
Students will have the opportunity to code basic simulations. Prerequisite: Mathematics 214
or Mathematics 222 and Statistics 331.
Semester course, three hours.

Mechanical Engineering
Dr. Clauss, Chair; Dr. Dixon, Assistant Chair; Dr. E. Anderson, Dr. Bardy, Dr. Fair, Dr.
Li, Dr. Richards, Dr. Ulrich.
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT MISSION STATEMENT,
OBJECTIVES, AND OUTCOMES
Mechanical Engineering (ME) is a broad discipline that develops technological
solutions to societal problems in order to benefit mankind. Examples of areas where we find
these challenges are transportation, power generation, energy conversion, product design,
manufacturing, sustainability, and production. Mechanical engineering education includes
such diverse topics as materials science, engineering design and analysis, thermodynamics,
solid and fluid mechanics, heat transfer, manufacturing processes, system dynamics,
teamwork, and project management. Our graduates apply their skills to a vast array of
problems. For instance, mechanical engineers develop renewable energy systems, new
medical devices, more fuel-efficient automobiles, climate control systems for buildings, and
so on. Mechanical engineers enjoy employment in a wide variety of areas including
research, design, manufacturing, production, technical marketing and sales, and
management. At Grove City College, we strive to develop our students’ God given talents
and abilities so that they may better serve the world around them.
The ME Department at Grove City College offers a program leading to the Bachelor
of Science in Mechanical Engineering (BSME) degree. The program is accredited by the
Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, http://www.abet.org.
Mechanical engineers must be proficient at both oral and written communications to
communicate their solutions and designs with other engineers and society in general.
Toward that end, the ME curriculum incorporates Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking
Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL) instruction within the core course
requirements.
The mission of our program is to produce graduates who can pursue leadership roles in
the mechanical engineering profession. The following program educational objectives
enable GCC mechanical engineers to meet this mission in the years following graduation:
1. Graduates will be successfully employed in the mechanical engineering profession
or in an alternative field. Many of our graduates will assume leadership roles in
these positions and be recognized as effective communicators and team members.
2. Graduates will engage in life-long learning through self-study, employer
sponsored continuing education courses or workshops, or through formal graduate
level education leading to an advanced degree.
3. Graduates will demonstrate ethical behavior in the workplace and will carry out
their professional duties in a manner that is consistent with a Christian worldview.
Our graduates possess the following student outcomes upon graduation:
1. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems applying principles
of engineering, science, and mathematics.
2. An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global,
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors.
3. An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 245

An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts.
5. An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan
tasks, and meet objectives.
6. An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions.
7. An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate
learning strategies.
These outcomes are met over a 4-year curriculum that starts with an exposure to the
fundamentals of science and engineering and culminates in our senior capstone design
experience.
4.

Freshman Year–Introduction to the fundamentals of chemistry, physics, calculus,
engineering computations, the profession of engineering, and the design process. Students
also learn to use Creo, a state-of-the-art CAD tool.
Sophomore Year–Emphasis on the analysis of problems in statics, dynamics,
materials science, and thermodynamics, and on the design and manufacturing process;
students are exposed to modern machine shop practice through the fabrication of an
individual project involving machining, fabrication, and assembly.
Junior Year–Analysis skills are honed in engineering math, circuit analysis, fluid
mechanics, heat transfer, and mechanics of materials. Sound experimental and design
techniques are reinforced in the required laboratory sequence. Students receive a solid
grounding in dynamic systems analysis and simulation, machine design, and stress analysis.
Opportunities for international study and travel are offered through our partnership with
affiliated universities in Nantes, France.
Senior Year–A major, year-long capstone design experience includes the design and
realization of an engineering product. Extensive computer-aided design and manufacturing
includes the use of Creo to document, analyze and fabricate designs. Advanced
manufacturing techniques covered include conventional and investment casting, injection
molding, CNC machining, and TIG/MIG welding. To assure the ability to work
professionally, seniors must complete at least 13 hours of Mechanical Engineering electives,
choosing a minimum of three credit hours in a given systems area. In addition, at least six
credit hours must be 400-level courses and a maximum of 4 credit hours may be earned
through one and two credit courses.
Mechanical Systems Electives:
MECE 303 Computer-Aided Manufacturing
MECE 390 Special Mechanical Engineering Topics
MECE 408 Mechanical Vibrations
MECE 410 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machinery
MECE 415 Finite Element Analysis
MECE 418 Human-Powered Vehicle Design
MECE 428 Biomechanics
MECE 498 Honors in Mechanical Engineering
MECE 260, 360, 460 Independent Study – indicated by instructor
MECE 270, 370, 470 Independent Research – indicated by instructor
ENGR 411 Control Systems

246 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

ROBO 301 Introduction to Robotics
ROBO 302 Mobile Robots
Thermal Systems Electives:
MECE 321 Advanced Thermodynamics
MECE 391 Special Mechanical Engineering Topics
MECE 414 Principles of HVAC
MECE 416 Survey of Renewable Energy Systems
MECE 421 Applied Fluid Mechanics
MECE 499 Honors in Mechanical Engineering
MECE 260, 360, 460 Independent Study – indicated by instructor
MECE 270, 370, 470 Independent Research – indicated by instructor
Technical Electives:
ENGR 304 Design of Experiments
ENGR 305 Introduction to LabVIEW
ENGR 331 Engineering Management and Cross-Cultural Communication
MECE 260, 360, 460 Independent Study – indicated by instructor
MECE 270, 370, 470 Independent Research – indicated by instructor
ENGR 301 Ethics in Engineering and Robotics
ENGR 390 Special Engineering Topics
ENGR 412 Modern Control Theory
NOTE: Additional electives may be offered at the discretion of the department.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Mechanical Engineering—97
hours
Mechanical Engineering Core (48 hours)
Engineering 120, Mechanical Engineering 107, 109, 201, 210, 211, 212, 214, 251,
252, 311, 312, 316, 325, 326, 351, 352, 401; Engineering or Robotics 451 and 452.
Engineering Core (6 hours)
Engineering 156, 402, and Electrical Engineering 210.
Math/Science Core (33 hours)
Chemistry 105 or 111 and 113; Engineering 274; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262;
Physics 101, 102.
Mechanical Engineering Electives* (13 hours)
A total of 13 credit hours must be fulfilled. Choose a minimum of three hours from
each systems area. At least six hours must be 400-level courses and a maximum of
four credit hours may be earned through one and two credit courses.
Mechanical Systems electives
Mechanical Engineering 260, 270, 303, 360, 370, 390, 408, 410, 415, 418, 428,
460, 470, 498, Engineering 411, Robotics 301, or 302.
Thermal Systems electives
Mechanical Engineering 260, 270, 321, 360, 370, 391, 414, 416, 421, 460, 470,
or 499.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 247

Technical Electives
Mechanical Engineering 260, 270, 360, 370, 460, 470, Engineering 301, 304,
305, 331, 390, or 412.
*A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study, independent research,
faculty-mentored research, and honors courses can be applied towards the Engineering
Electives requirements.
Courses that count in the Mechanical Engineering major quality point average
(MQPA):
All courses with “MECE” and “ROBO” prefix; ELEE 210; and all “ENGR” prefix
except ENGR 480. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (MECE) MAJOR
FOUR-YEAR PLAN
1st
FRESHMAN YEAR
Sem.
Chemistry 105 or 111, 113 4
Engineering 156
Mathematics 161-162
4
Mech. Engineering 107
2
Mech. Engineering 109
2
Engineering 120
Physics 101
HUMA 102 - WRIT 101
3
Physical Education
1
16

2nd
Sem.
2
4
3
4
3
16

JUNIOR YEAR
Elec. Engineering 210
Engineering 274
3
Math/Science Elective
3
Mech. Engineering 311-312 3
Mech. Engineering 316
Mech. Engineering 325-326 3
Mech. Engineering 351-352 1
Foundations of Social Science Humanities 200
3
16

3
3
3
3
1
3
16

SOPHOMORE YEAR
Mathematics 261-262
Mech. Engineering 201
Mech. Engineering 210
Mech. Engineering 211-212
Mech. Engineering 214
Mech. Engineering 251-252
Physics 102
SSFT course
Humanities 202

SENIOR YEAR
Engineering 402
Mech. Engineering 401
Engineering 451-452
Mech. Engineering Electives
Humanities 301-303
General Elective

1st 2nd
Sem. Sem.
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
4
2
3
17
16

3
1
9
3
16

1
3
4
3
4
15

Course Requirements for a minor in Robotics (19-20 hours)
A minor in Robotics will consist of Robotics 301, 302; Engineering 301; a 3-4 credit
robotics-related capstone project; and nine hours from Computer Science 445, Electrical
Engineering 310, Engineering 411, Engineering 412, Mechanical Engineering 316, or
Mechanical Engineering 410 or Engineering 390 Introduction to Mechatronics.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

248 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Engineering Core Courses (ENGR)
ENGR 120. NUMERICAL COMPUTING FOR ENGINEERS. This course introduces
students to applied numerical computation, with an emphasis on solving typical engineering
problems. Sequential logic programming is taught using MATLAB. Topics include array
and scalar operators, program control elements, graphic and text I/O, internal and userdefined functions. Students are introduced to numerical methods such as root finding,
solutions to systems of linear equations, linear regression, and numerical integration and
differentiation. Corequisites: Mathematics 161 and Physics 101.
Semester course, three hours.
ENGR 156. INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING. Introduces students to the
engineering profession and the design process. Course lectures and assignments include the
design process; problem definition and solution; oral and written communications; group
dynamics; public responsibility; current global engineering challenges; and engineering
ethics. A group design project is required. For Mechanical Engineering students, this course
is taken concurrently with ENGR 120.
Semester course, two hours.
ENGR 274. MATHEMATICAL METHODS IN ENGINEERING. A course for
engineering and science majors covering selected topics in probability and statistics, linear
algebra, discrete mathematics, and numerical methods as applied to the solution of problems
in engineering and science. Students who receive credit for Mathematics 213, 222, and 331
may not receive credit for Engineering 274. Prerequisite: Mathematics 162.
Semester course, three hours.
ENGR 301. ETHICS IN ENGINEERING AND ROBOTICS. This course investigates
ethical decision-making from a Christian perspective as it applies to engineering and
robotics. It includes an overview of approaches to ethical decision-making, as well as
particular issues raised by the robotics field, such as robots making military decisions,
privacy issues with in-home robots, issues with emotional bonds, etc.
Semester course, one hour.
ENGR 304. DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS. Design of experiments for engineering design
optimization and analysis. An introduction to the statistically designed experimental
techniques commonly used by engineers for design and process optimization, including
ANOVA, factorial, CCD, Taguchi, and I-optimal designs. Prerequisite: Junior status or
permission of instructor.
Spring semester, one hour.
ENGR 305. INTRODUCTION TO LABVIEW. Introduction to LabVIEW. Presents the
fundamentals of the LabVIEW graphical programming environment. This visual
programming language is from National Instruments and is commonly used for data
acquisition, instrument control, and industrial automation. Students will gain a basic
understanding of LabVIEW programming practices and will develop LabVIEW
applications for data acquisition, data analysis, and real-time control.
Spring semester, one hour.
ENGR 331. ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT AND CROSS-CULTURAL
COMMUNICATION. Introduction to the tools needed to manage technical projects in an
international setting including (1) cross-cultural communication/management, with a
special emphasis on foreign vs. U.S. language/culture, and (2) selected introductory
engineering management and design process topics. Lectures and company case studies are
supplemented with cultural and engineering field trips. Open to all GCC students. This
course can be used to satisfy three technical elective credits in Mechanical and Electrical

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 249

Engineering. Prerequisite: Sophomore or higher standing in mechanical or electrical
engineering.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGR 390. SPECIAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in the areas of new
engineering development based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject
matter varies each semester with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of
registration.
Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
ENGR 402. ENGINEERING ECONOMY. Principles and methods for analyzing the
economic feasibility of engineering projects including interest, depreciation, rate-of-return,
economic life, replacement costs, and comparison of alternative designs. Aspects of this
course will be involved in the final phase of Senior Capstone projects. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 141 or 161. Corequisite: Mechanical Engineering 452, Electrical Engineering
452, or Robotics 452.
Spring Semester Only, one hour.
ENGR 411. CONTROL SYSTEMS. A study of the design and analysis of feedback
control systems using classical techniques. Topics include modeling of mechanical and
electrical dynamic systems, a review of Laplace transform techniques, steady-state error,
transient response, stability, root locus design methods, Bode analysis/stability margins, and
Bode compensator design. Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations and hands-on projects.
Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 210 or 201; Mechanical Engineering 316 or Electrical
Engineering 321; and Engineering 274, Mathematics 214, or Mathematics 222.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ENGR 412. MODERN CONTROL THEORY. Analysis and design of feedback control
systems using modern control modeling and design techniques. Topics include state space
modeling of mechanical and electrical systems, design of state-space controllers and
observers, Kalman filtering, and an introduction to advanced topics such as robust control,
optimal control (LGR/LQG), and others. Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations and
hands-on projects. Prerequisite: Engineering 411.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ENGR 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN LABORATORY I. An advanced lab course requiring
the student to complete the senior group design project. For electrical engineering majors,
this will include performing experiments in control systems, digital communication
systems, and initiation of work with the senior design team. For mechanical engineering
majors, this will include 3-D computer-aided design and manufacturing techniques and
experiments related to the senior project. Written reports and oral presentations are
required. Engineering 451 is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Speaking Intensive
(SI) course for Engineering majors. Prerequisites: Senior standing in Engineering.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ENGR 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN LABORATORY II. An advanced lab course
requiring student teams to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral
presentations are required. Engineering 452 is designed to fulfill the requirements for
Speaking Intensive (SI) course for Engineering majors. Prerequisites: Senior standing
Engineering and ENGR 451.
Spring semester only, three hours
ENGR 480. INTERNSHIP IN ENGINEERING. An opportunity for junior or senior
engineering majors to participate in an extended work experience (six months or more)
under the supervision of an on-site manager and a department faculty member. Products of
the internship will include an evaluation by the on-site manager, a journal of the internship
experience, and a paper describing the experience and relating it to academic theory. This

250 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

course may be repeated a maximum of three times. Prerequisite: Permission from the
department chair.
Semester course, one hour.

Mechanical Engineering (MECE)
MECE 107. ENGINEERING GRAPHICS. A study of the principles of engineering
drawing, including detailed part drawings. Students will learn to read and create detailed
technical drawings. Topics include orthographic and pictorial views, section views, and
auxiliary views. Dimensioning and tolerancing in accordance with ANSI Y14.5, including
geometric dimensioning and tolerancing is emphasized.
Fall semester only, two hours.
MECE 109. INTRO TO SOLID MODELING. An introduction to basic CAD modeling.
Students will be introduced to mechanical engineering terminology and mechanical
components such as screws, gears, shafts, etc. An introduction to CAD solid modeling with
Creo, including basic part and assembly models is also included. A small design project will
introduce CAD design tools, including additive manufacturing.
Fall semester only, two hours.
MECE 201. FUNDAMENTALS OF MATERIALS SCIENCE. Models of crystalline
and molecular structures are presented to explain the diverse properties of metallic;
polymeric and ceramic materials; including atomic bonding and crystal structure; elastic
and plastic deformation; phase of equilibria and transformation; thermal processing; and
corrosion. Prerequisite: Chemistry 105.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 210. DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING. Introduction to manufacturing
processes, including part characteristics, economic production quantities, materials, and
design recommendations. Emphasis is placed on process and material selection and design
for manufacturability. The course includes plant tours. Prerequisites: Mechanical
Engineering 107, 109, and 201.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 211. MECHANICS I. Static equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies; analysis of
structures, trusses, and cables; friction; centroids and moments of inertia; methods of virtual
work; and energy are addressed. Engineering applications are also incorporated.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 162, Engineering 120, and Physics 101.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 212. MECHANICS II. A study of rectilinear and curvilinear motion of particles
and rigid bodies; kinetics of particles and rigid bodies; relative motion, work, and energy;
impulse and momentum are taught along with engineering applications. Prerequisite:
Mechanical Engineering 211.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 214. THERMODYNAMICS. The study of the fundamental principles and some
applications of classical thermodynamics. Topics include properties of pure substances;
heat, work, and mass transfer; first law of thermodynamics; second law of thermodynamics;
entropy; gas power cycles; vapor power cycles; and refrigeration cycles. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 162.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 251. MECHANICAL SYSTEMS LABORATORY I. A lab course designed to
introduce students to engineering practices including dimensioning, gaging and measuring,
machining operations, manufacturing processes, and engineering standards for fasteners,
threads, etc. Hands-on application will be taught through an individual project involving
machining, fabrication, and assembly. Materials testing laboratories are also part of this
course. Mechanical Engineering 251 is designed to fulfill the requirements for an

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 251

Information Literacy (IL) course in the Mechanical Engineering major. Prerequisite:
Sophomore standing in mechanical engineering.
Fall semester only, one hour.
MECE 252. MECHANICAL SYSTEMS LABORATORY II. A lab course designed to
introduce students to engineering experimental techniques, including planning, controls,
basic instrumentation, and basic data analysis. Prerequisites: Sophomore standing in
mechanical engineering and Mechanical Engineering 251. Spring semester only, one hour.
MECE 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
mechanical engineering. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent
study, independent research, and honors courses can be applied towards one of the
following: Mechanical Systems, Thermal Systems, or Technical Electives.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MECE 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in mechanical engineering. Sophomore standing, permission of the department
chair, and a faculty sponsor are required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for
independent study, independent research, and honors courses can be applied towards one of
the following: Mechanical Systems, Thermal Systems, or Technical Electives.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MECE 303. COMPUTER-AIDED MANUFACTURING. Introduction to computeraided manufacturing using Creo CAD/CAM software. Students will learn to program CNC
machine tools, including three axis mills, lathes, and wire EDM machines, as well as basic
pattern and mold design for sand casting, injection molding, and vacuum forming.
Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 107 and 109. January intersession only, three hours.
MECE 311. MECHANICS OF MATERIALS. Fundamentals of mechanics of materials,
including stress and strain; axial loading; Hooke's Law and Poisson's ratio; torsion; bending;
transverse loading; stress and strain transformations; beam analysis; and buckling.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 262 and Mechanical Engineering 210 and 212.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 312. STRESS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF MACHINE COMPONENTS.
Application of stress analysis to static, fatigue, and surface fatigue failures. Design of shafts,
including limits and fits and bearing selection. Design and selection of machine elements
such as screws, bolted joints, springs, gears, brakes, etc. Prerequisite: Mechanical
Engineering 311.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 316. SYSTEM DYNAMICS. Modeling and analysis of dynamic systems
consisting of mechanical, electrical, and electromechanical elements. Development of
system models using transfer functions, block diagrams, and state variable methods. System
analysis in the time and frequency domains. Includes MATLAB/Simulink simulations.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 262 and Mechanical Engineering 212; or Physics 303 and either
Engineering 120 or Computer Science 141.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 321. ADVANCED THERMODYNAMICS. Application of thermodynamic
principles. Topics include reviewing equations of state, properties, conservation of mass,
conservation of energy, second law of thermodynamics, and cycles; exergy; property
relationships; gas and gas-vapor mixtures; air conditioning; chemical reactions; chemical
and phase equilibrium; and compressible-fluid flow. Prerequisite: Mathematics 261 and
Mechanical Engineering 214.
Fall semester only, three hours.

252 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

MECE 325. FLUID MECHANICS. The study of steady and unsteady flow of primarily
incompressible fluids; the application of the conservation laws of mass, momentum, and
energy to fluid systems; the control volume approach to distributed systems; and the
application of experimental techniques to problems. Prerequisites: Mathematics 261, 262;
and Mechanical Engineering 211 or Physics 303 (for majors) or Physics 121 (for nonmajors).
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 326. HEAT TRANSFER. The fundamentals of heat transfer by conduction,
convection, and radiation; application to practical heat transfer devices; engineering
analysis of heat exchangers; and design problems solved by analytical, numerical, and
computer methods. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 214, Physics 340, or Chemistry
346; and Mechanical Engineering 325.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 351. INSTRUMENTATION LABORATORY. A lab course that reinforces the
lab techniques introduced in Mechanical Engineering 251-252. Experiments chosen from
strain analysis, first and second order systems, and vibration analysis. Mechanical
Engineering 351 is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Writing Intensive (WI) course
in the Mechanical Engineering major. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 252.
Corequisite: Mechanical Engineering 311.
Fall semester only, one hour.
MECE 352. THERMAL/FLUIDS LABORATORY. A lab course that reinforces the lab
techniques introduced in Mechanical Engineering 251-252. Experiments chosen from
thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer. Corequisite: Mechanical Engineering
326.
Spring semester only, one hour.
MECE 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
mechanical engineering. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study,
independent research, and honors courses can be applied towards one of the following:
Mechanical Systems, Thermal Systems, or Technical Electives.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MECE 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in mechanical engineering. Junior standing, permission of the department chair,
and a faculty sponsor are required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for
independent study, independent research, and honors courses can be applied towards the
Mechanical Engineering elective requirements. Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MECE 390. SPECIAL MECHANICAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in
mechanical engineering based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject
matter varies each semester with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of
registration. This course can be used to satisfy a portion of the mechanical systems elective
requirements in Mechanical Engineering. Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
MECE 391. SPECIAL MECHANICAL ENGINEERING TOPICS. Special topics in
mechanical engineering based on student demand and faculty interest. Specific subject
matter varies each semester with prerequisites and credit hours announced in advance of
registration. This course can be used to satisfy a portion of the thermal systems elective
requirements in Mechanical Engineering. Semester course, one, two, three or four hours.
MECE 401. CAPSTONE DESIGN I. Completion of the senior design project. A study of
the principles and methods of designing mechanical engineering systems in today’s society,
including the design process; decision making in design; engineering economics; analysis

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 253

and verification of performance; and environmental impact. Prerequisite: Senior standing in
mechanical engineering. Corequisite: Mechanical Engineering 451.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 408. MECHANICAL VIBRATIONS. A study of the dynamic response of lumped
parameter systems with one and two degrees of freedom subjected to periodic and nonperiodic excitation; applications to the control of undesirable vibrations in machines; theory
of seismic instruments; and an introduction to distributed parameter systems. Prerequisites:
Mechanical Engineering 311 and 316.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 410. KINEMATICS AND DYNAMICS OF MACHINERY. Modeling, analysis,
and design of linkages, cams, and gear trains, including machine dynamics. Introduction to
dynamic systems modeling using computer-aided analysis, including Creo. Prerequisite:
Mechanical Engineering 311.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 414. PRINCIPLES OF HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIR
CONDITIONING. Analysis and design of components and systems used to condition air
in buildings. Topics include air-conditioning systems, psychrometrics, conditioning
processes, indoor air quality, heat transfer, solar radiation, heating loads, cooling loads,
annual energy usage, pumps and piping, fans and ducts, and refrigeration equipment.
Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 326.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 415. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS. A study of the finite element method and
its application to mechanical engineering problems. Topics include basic concepts; stiffness
matrices; truss structures; flexure elements; method of weighted residuals; interpolation
functions; and applications to heat transfer, fluid mechanics, solid mechanics, and structural
dynamics. Prerequisites: Engineering 274, Mechanical Engineering 312 and 326.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 416. SURVEY OF RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS. A survey of the
technical and social aspects of alternative and renewable energy systems. Topics include
hydropower, wind energy, solar power, biomass, fuel cells and hydrogen economy, nuclear
power, and geothermal and ocean energy. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 326.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 418. HUMAN-POWERED VEHICLE DESIGN. Computer-aided modeling,
analysis, and design of human-powered vehicles for land, water, and air. Includes analysis
of vehicle dynamics and handling, performance predictions, and CAD-based design tools
integrating dynamic models with Creo models. Two lectures and one lab per week.
Corequisites: Mechanical Engineering 311 and 325.
Semester course, three hours.
MECE 421. APPLIED FLUID MECHANICS. Advanced treatment and application of
the equations and empirical data that describe fluid phenomena in both internal and external
fluid systems. Introduction to techniques important to research and design in fluid
applications, specifically computational and experimental fluid dynamics. Among the topics
covered are potential flow, added mass, boundary layer flow, lubrication theory and
bearings, turbomachinery, turbulence, non-Newtonian fluids, compressible flow, and
biofluid dynamics. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 326.
Fall semester only, three hours.
MECE 428. BIOMECHANICS. The course will explore the key topics within the
contemporary field of biomechanics—the application of mechanics to biological systems—
with the goal of preparing students for further work in cutting-edge fields such as biomedical

254 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

engineering, novel propulsion systems, and other biologically-inspired engineering. Among
the topics covered are biomaterials, mechanical properties of biological structures,
biomimetic robotics, terrestrial locomotion, swimming, flying, prosthetics, external and
internal fluid flows, efficiency, blood flow, experimental techniques, and flow visualization.
Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 311 and 325, or Physics 232, or Mathematics 161
and Physics 121 and Biology 102.
Spring semester only, three hours.
MECE 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
mechanical engineering. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study,
independent research, and honors courses can be applied towards one of the following:
Mechanical Systems, Thermal Systems, or Technical Electives.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MECE 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in mechanical engineering. Senior standing, permission of the department chair,
and a faculty sponsor are required. A combined total of up to three credit hours for
independent study, independent research, and honors courses can be applied towards one of
the following: Mechanical Systems, Thermal Systems, or Technical Electives.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MECE 498. HONORS IN MECHANICAL ENGINEERING. Seniors (and in some
instances, juniors) who have shown special aptitude in mechanical engineering may, with
consent of the department, undertake special research and design problems. This course may
be used to satisfy a portion of the mechanical systems elective requirements in Mechanical
Engineering. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study,
independent research, and honors courses can be applied towards the Mechanical
Engineering elective requirements. Cannot be repeated for more than a total of three credit
hours.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MECE 499. HONORS IN MECHANICAL ENGINEERING. Seniors (and in some
instances, juniors) who have shown special aptitude in mechanical engineering may, with
consent of the department, undertake special research and design problems. This course may
be used to satisfy a portion of the thermal systems elective requirements in Mechanical
Engineering. A combined total of up to three credit hours for independent study,
independent research, and honors courses can be applied towards the Mechanical
Engineering elective requirements. Cannot be repeated for more than a total of three credit
hours.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Robotics (ROBO)
ROBO 301. INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS. Presents the fundamentals of robot mechanisms,
kinematics, dynamics, and controls. Topics include forward and inverse kinematics,
differential motion and velocities, dynamics and force control, path and trajectory planning,
actuators and drive systems, and sensors used in robotic systems. The basics of robotic
control systems are briefly presented. The use of vision systems in robotics is introduced.
Two lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite: Electrical Engineering 321 or Mechanical
Engineering 316, robotics minor, or permission of instructor.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ROBO 302. MOBILE ROBOTS. An introduction to the basic principles of mobile robots,
including mechanical, sensory, and cognitive systems necessary for successful operation.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 255

Topics will include hardware, locomotion, sensors, control schemes, localization, and
navigation. Hands-on lab experiences with real robots and a final project supplement lecture
material. Two lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisites: Physics 101; Mathematics 261;
and Engineering 274 or Mathematics 214.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ROBO 451. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT I. An advanced lab course where students
learn techniques and engage in experiments relating to their senior group design project.
Written reports and oral presentations are required. Prerequisite: Senior standing in
engineering or permission of the instructor.
Fall semester only, one hour.
ROBO 452. CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT II. An advanced lab course requiring
student teams to complete their group design project. Written reports and oral presentations
are required. Robotics 452 is designed to fulfill the requirements for the Speaking Intensive
(SI) course in the Electrical and Computer Engineering or Mechanical Engineering major.
Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering and one of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, or Robotics 451.
Spring semester only, three hours.

Modern Languages
Dr. Madsen, Chair; Ms. Carruth, Dr. Killam, Dr. Knupp, Dr. Ruane.
Language Placement Guidelines
Students who have had prior exposure to a language but have not taken an AP
exam or received college credit in the language must take the Foreign Language
Placement Exam before registering for their first modern languages course at Grove City
College. This includes incoming freshmen, transfer students, and current students.
Students may take the placement exam any time during the spring or summer in
anticipation of fall registration or during the fall or winter in anticipation of spring
registration. Scores will remain valid for six months. After initial placement, a student’s
progression into advanced courses will be determined by successful completion of
prerequisites.
Students should only take the exam once within a six-month period unless given
permission to repeat the exam by the department. They are expected to adhere to Grove
City College’s Academic Integrity Policy. That is, the work should be the student’s own
and should not contain that which has been knowingly obtained from another. The use of
notes, dictionaries, translating tools, textbooks, and all other forms of assistance during the
placement test are prohibited.
If it becomes apparent that a student in his/her first term of study of a language at Grove
City College has been placed in a class that is inappropriate for his/her abilities, he/she may
be placed back or advanced at the option of the Department. This may be done no later than
the end of the third week of classes. Note: A student may repeat a course in which he/she
previously earned a grade of ‘C-’ or lower. A student who passes a course with a ‘C’ grade
or higher may not later repeat the same class for credit or audit unless the course is
designated as repeatable for multiple credits.
Note: Language study is progressive and sequential. For example, 101 must be
followed by 102, 102 by 201, and 201 by 202.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in French—30 hours
French Core Requirements (30 hours):
French 201 and 202, or two 300-level French electives (excluding French 362);
French 301; 305 or 340; French 307; 308; two French literature courses from French

256 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

320, 321, 325, 326, 331, or 332; and two French electives (six hours) at the 300-level
(excluding French 362).
Courses that count in the French major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “FREN” prefix, excluding FREN 101 and FREN 102. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in French and K-12 Education
Certification—75 hours
French Core Requirements (32 hours):
French 201 and 202, or two 300-level French electives; French 301; 305 or 340;
French 307; 308; 362; two French literature courses from French 320, 321, 325, 326,
331, or 332;; and two French electives (six hours) at the 300-level.
Education Requirements (43 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 307, 316, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for
additional details on teacher certification requirements.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Spanish—33 hours
Spanish Language Core Requirements (18 hours):
Spanish 201 and 202, or two 300-level Spanish electives (excluding Spanish 362);
Spanish 301, 303, 305, and 306.
Literature and Culture Core Requirements (9 hours):
Spanish 344; one course from Spanish 320, 330, or 331; and one course from Spanish
321, 325, 328.
Spanish Electives (6 hours):
Any two 300- or 400-level Spanish courses (excluding Spanish 362).
Courses that count in the Spanish major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “SPAN” prefix, excluding SPAN 101, 102, 201 and 202. A minimum
MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Spanish and K-12 Education
Certification—78 hours
Spanish Language Core Requirements (20 hours):
Spanish 201 and 202, or two 300-level Spanish electives; Spanish 301, 303, 305,
306, and 362.
Literature and Culture Core Requirements (9 hours):
Spanish 344; one course from Spanish 320, 330, or 331; and one course from Spanish
321, 325, 328.
Spanish Electives (6 hours):
Any two 300- or 400-level Spanish courses.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 257

Education Requirements (43 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 307, 316, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for
additional details on teacher certification requirements.
International Business Major
This program leads to a Bachelor of Science degree, combining business and modern
language studies. Consult the Department of Management and Marketing for program
requirements.
Classical Languages
Consult the Department of Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy for Biblical
Hebrew, New Testament Greek, and Latin course descriptions as well as the requirements
for the Classical Studies minor.
Writing Intensive/Speaking Intensive/Information Literacy Studies
The Department of Modern Languages stresses the acquisition of skills in speaking,
writing, and analysis/research. The following courses are designated as Writing Intensive
(WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL): French 307 (WI); French 305,
340 (SI); French 320, 32l, 325, 326, 331, 332 (IL) for the French major; and Spanish 303
(SI); Spanish 320, 321, 325, 328, 330, 331 (WI) and (IL) for the Spanish major.
Course Requirements for a minor in French (18 hours)
A minor in French will consist of 18 hours of French courses beyond French 101 and
102, excluding French 362.
Course Requirements for a minor in International Studies (18-21 hours)
A minor in International Studies will consist of 18-21 required hours,
including:
(1) intermediate modern language competency (0-3 hours) demonstrated by:
a) completion of a 202 course or higher in a widely spoken modern language
other than the student’s native language or
b) with approval from the Modern Languages department, a placement test or
other evidence of proficiency equivalent to the completion of a 202-level
language class (note: the high school waiver for the language requirement does
not count toward this minor);
(2) an approved international academic experience (study abroad) at the college level for a
semester or year, or an approved international internship experience (note: in the event of
a personal, regional, or international crisis, the student may petition to waive this
requirement);
(3) 3 hours from Communication Arts 225, Global Studies 300, Psychology 200, or
Sociology 103;
(4) and 15 hours from the following courses, with no more than 3 courses from any one of
these emphases areas:
(a) International History: History 141, 144, 212, 230, 231, 262, 265, 365, and
290 or 390 with approval depending on the topic.
(b) International Politics: Political Science 201, 311, 333, 341, 344

258 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

(c) Global Economics: International Business 205, 416, 445; Economics 202,
206.
(d) Advanced Modern Language: Any 300-level French or Spanish language
classes except French/Spanish 362; or 300-level classes in another modern
language through transfer/study abroad.
(e) Global Society, Religion, and Culture: Sociology 241, 375; Religion 248;
English 205, 206, 250, 324, 325; Music 330; Art 202; any courses with a
“GOBL” prefix.
Course Requirements for a minor in Spanish (18 hours)
A minor in Spanish will consist of 18 hours of Spanish courses beyond Spanish 101
and 102, excluding Spanish 362.
Course Requirements for a concentration in Professional Spanish (9 hours)
A concentration in Professional Spanish will consist of Spanish 315 and 316, and one
3-hour conversation or writing course from Spanish 303 or 306.
Study Abroad
Study abroad is strongly encouraged for language majors. Selection of a program and
of specific courses takes place in consultation with the Office of Global Programs, the Chair
of the Department of Modern Languages, individual modern language advisors, and the
Registrar. Detailed information about the Grove City College Study Abroad program is
available by accessing www.gcc.edu/academics/oie. Language majors seeking assistance
regarding program options, transfer of credits, application forms, deadlines, letters of
recommendation, and other matters related to study abroad may contact the Modern
Languages Department Chair.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

French (FREN)
FREN 101. ELEMENTARY FRENCH I. The first of a two-semester elementary
sequence that moves students towards functional proficiency in the four skill areas (reading,
writing, listening, speaking) while increasing their cultural literacy of the French-speaking
world. Intended for students with little or no prior exposure to the French language, this
course emphasizes successful communication in real-life situations and a basic
understanding of the main elements of French grammar. Taught in French. Students who
have previously studied French must take the placement exam before enrolling in French
101.
Fall semester only, three hours.
FREN 102. ELEMENTARY FRENCH II. The second of a two-semester elementary
sequence that moves students towards functional proficiency in the four skill areas (reading,
writing, listening, speaking) while increasing their cultural literacy of the French-speaking
world. Taught in French. Prerequisite: French 101 or placement exam.
Spring semester only, three hours.
FREN 201. INTERMEDIATE FRENCH I. The first of a two-semester intermediate
sequence that moves students towards functional proficiency in the four skill areas (reading,
writing, listening, speaking) while increasing their cultural literacy of the French-speaking
world. Students progress from formulas and single sentence utterances to paragraph-length
discourse. Taught in French. Prerequisite: French 102 or placement exam.
Fall semester only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 259

FREN 202. INTERMEDIATE FRENCH II. The second of a two-semester intermediate
sequence that moves students towards functional proficiency in the four skill areas (reading,
writing, listening, speaking) while increasing their cultural literacy of the French-speaking
world. Students develop increasing communicative sophistication. Taught in French.
Prerequisite: French 201 or placement exam.
Spring semester only, three hours.
FREN 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in French.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
FREN 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in French. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
FREN 301. UNDERSTANDING FRANCE AND THE FRENCH. Students gain insight
into modern day France and her people through an understanding of her recent history,
institutions, conventions, and cultural products. A variety of sources (articles, films, essays,
etc.) will facilitate discussion of key aspects of French society. Taught in French.
Prerequisite: French 202 or placement exam.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
FREN 305. TOPICS IN FRENCH AND FRANCOPHONE STUDIES. Students hone
skills of description, narration, and evaluation through the observation and discussion of
various cultural elements of the French-speaking world. Different topics will be studied in
different semesters and may include gastronomy, fashion, sports, music, places (such as
Paris), or major cultural figures. This course fulfills the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement
for the French major and may be repeated for credit provided the topic is different. Taught
in French. Prerequisite: French 202 or placement exam.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
FREN 307. FRENCH COMPOSITION AND STYLE. The purpose of this course is to
refine students’ writing ability in French. Through a variety of assignments arranged around
specific genres (e.g. a movie review, a persuasive essay, a job cover letter, etc.), students
will hone their ability to communicate clearly and with greater sophistication. To prepare
for writing their own compositions, students will read texts in the target genres in order to
identify effective argumentation, style, and tone. In addition to covering more advanced
skills, the course will review key grammatical structures according to the needs of the class.
This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI) requirement for the French major. Taught in
French. Prerequisite: French 202 or placement exam.
Fall semester only, three hours.
FREN 308. APPLIED PHONETICS. Offering both a theoretical and practical approach
to the French phonetic system, this course guides students through the sounds and prosody
of French as contrasted with English with the help of the International Phonetic Alphabet.
In addition to learning to identify and transcribe all French phonemes, students will improve
their own pronunciation and intonation via extensive oral practice and individualized
feedback. Required of French majors and those desiring teacher certification in French.
Taught in French. Prerequisites: French 202 or placement exam.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
FREN 315. BUSINESS FRENCH. Through this course, students acquire the linguistic
skills and cultural information they need to prepare for the Chambre de commerce et
d’industrie de Paris examinations. They familiarize themselves with business practices of

260 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

the Francophone world. They are exposed to key French business topics and to essential
career practices, as well as to cultural concepts particular to French businesses. Areas of
concentration are: 1. La Correspondance; 2. La micro-informatique, Internet, le courier
électronique; 3. La recherche d’un emploi; 4. La typologie des entreprises; 5. L’organisation
des enterprises; 6. Le marketing; 7. La banque et les moyens de paiement; 8. Les transports
et le commerce international. Taught in French. Prerequisite: French 300-level course.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
FREN 320. MEDIEVAL AND EARLY MODERN FRENCH LITERATURE. A survey
of French literature from its beginnings in the eleventh century to the seventeenth century.
Through fiction, poetry, essays, treatises, emblems, and images, this course explores the
relationships among literary creation, political events, religious movements, artistic
innovations, and scientific discoveries. Readings may include La Vie de Saint Alexis, The
Song of Roland, Marguerite de Navarre, Rabelais, Ronsard, Montaigne, Descartes, Pascal,
and Madame de Lafayette. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement
for the French major. Taught in French. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by
permission.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
FREN 321. 18th THROUGH 21st CENTURY FRENCH LITERATURE. An
introduction to French literary development from the eighteenth to the twenty-first century.
From Louis XIV’s absolute monarchy through the French Revolution to two World Wars
and decolonization, these centuries provoked rich and diverse literary production, often as
a means of social and political engagement. Authors may include Voltaire, Rousseau,
Diderot, Stendhal, Hugo, Balzac, Flaubert, Zola, Modiano, Duras, Queneau, Condé, Ben
Jelloun, Nothomb, etc. Taught in French. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by
permission.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
FREN 325. FRENCH THEATRE. A course designed to give students an overview of the
history and evolution of theater in the French-speaking world. Readings may include
Molière, Corneille, Racine, Beaumarchais, Hugo, Sartre, Ionesco, Beckett, and Césaire.
This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the French major. Taught
in French. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by permission.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
FREN 326. CINEMA. This course aims to provide students with the tools to understand
and analyze films and other visual media. Students will gain technical knowledge of cinema
and its analysis alongside a study of the history of French-language cinema from the era of
the Lumière brothers (1895) to the present, including film noir and la Nouvelle Vague. The
class will study enduring classics as well as examples of popular films in order to better
understand French society, culture, and history. Taught in French. Prerequisite: French 202
(French 307 is strongly encouraged but not required).
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
FREN 331. POETRY. The goal of this course is to enable students to express themselves
with increased sophistication and to practice “explication de textes”, this staple of French
classical education. Students will study the biographies and also selected texts by
nineteenth- and twentieth- century poets from France and the francophone world: Hugo,
Nerval, Baudelaire, Mallarmé, Verlaine, Rimbaud, Valéry, Senghor, and Césaire. This
course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the French major. Taught in
French. Prerequisite: French 300-level course or by permission.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 261

FREN 332. CARIBBEAN AND AFRICAN LITERATURE IN FRENCH. The goal of
this course is to familiarize students with the vibrant literary scene in French-speaking
regions outside of Europe, with an emphasis on the Caribbean, North Africa, and SubSaharan Africa. The course may include novels, essays, or short stories by authors such as
Suzanne Dracius (Martinique), Patrick Chamoiseau (Martinique), Albert Memmi (Tunisia),
Assia Djebar (Algeria), Alain Mabanckou (Republic of Congo), and Leonora Miano
(Cameroon). This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the French
major. Taught in French. Prerequisite: French 300-level course, or by permission.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
FREN 340. MOMENTS IN FRENCH AND FRANCOPHONE HISTORY. Through the
study of historical events and developments in the French-speaking world, students expand
on the skills of description and narration acquired in French 305 and move toward more
sophisticated modes of discourse, such as discussing abstract ideas, constructing arguments,
and hypothesizing. Different topics will be studied in different semesters and may include
the beginnings of the French language, philosophical ideas (e.g. Enlightenment,
existentialism), Medieval culture, the Renaissance, Louis XIV and Versailles, French
colonization and its aftermath, France in WWII, etc. This course fulfills the Speaking
Intensive (SI) requirement for the French major and may be repeated for credit provided the
topic is different. Taught in French. Prerequisites: French 300-level course, or by
permission.
Spring semester only, three hours.
FREN 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in French.
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
FREN 362. ASPECTS OF LANGUAGE LEARNING. A course designed to provide
opportunities to teach various grammar aspects of the French language, and to examine and
implement a variety of technical aspects and resources in the foreign language curriculum
in preparation for student teaching. Teacher candidates will regularly reflect on their
teaching experiences and will develop a portfolio of materials representing their teaching in
the target language. Required of all students desiring teacher certification in a foreign
language. Taught in English.
Spring semester of the sophomore year, two hours.
FREN 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in French. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
FREN 390. STUDIES IN FRENCH. Readings and discussion of topics in literature or
language. Subject matter varies. Taught in French.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
FREN 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in French.
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
FREN 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in French. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

262 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Spanish (SPAN)
SPAN 101. ELEMENTARY SPANISH I. This course is intended for students with no
previous study of Spanish or those who have had minimal exposure to the language. An
introduction to Spanish, stressing the spoken language and giving practice in grammar,
reading, writing, and developing an awareness of culture. Taught in Spanish. Students who
have previously studied Spanish must take the placement exam before enrolling in Spanish
101.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SPAN 102. ELEMENTARY SPANISH II. Continuation of Spanish 101. Further
development of basic communication skills including listening, speaking, reading, writing,
and developing an awareness of culture. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 101 or
placement exam.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SPAN 201. INTERMEDIATE SPANISH I. This course is appropriate for students who
have completed Spanish 101 and 102. A review of elementary Spanish and an intensive
study of grammar and vocabulary in oral and written practice, readings from selected texts,
and the development of cultural awareness. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 102 or
placement exam.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SPAN 202. INTERMEDIATE SPANISH II. Continuation of Spanish 201. The intensive
study of grammar and vocabulary in oral and written practice, readings from selected texts,
and the development of cultural awareness. Further development of basic communication
skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish
201 or placement exam.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SPAN 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Spanish.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
SPAN 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Spanish. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
SPAN 301. INTRODUCTION TO LITERATURE AND FILM. Introduction to
techniques of literary and film analysis via study of representative works by major authors
and filmmakers of the Spanish-speaking world. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish
202 or placement exam.
Semester course offered annually, three hours.
SPAN 303. CONVERSATION. This course examines contemporary cultural and social
trends in Spain, the United States, and Latin America and trains students in interpersonal
and presentational communication with a professional focus while offering a review of key
grammatical structures. This course fulfills the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the
Spanish major. Required of all Spanish majors and those desiring teacher certification in
Spanish. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 202 or placement exam.
Semester course offered annually, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 263

SPAN 305. APPLIED PHONETICS. This course is a systematic examination of how the
sounds of Spanish are produced. By learning and applying phonetic and phonological
principles, this course is intended to help students improve their pronunciation. It also
introduces the linguistic variation of Spanish in Spain, the United States, and Latin America.
Students learn to identify and comprehend the dialects of Spanish and will be trained in
using this skill in professional settings. Required of all Spanish majors and those desiring
teacher certification in Spanish. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 202 or placement
exam. Spanish 202 may be taken concurrently with permission from the department.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SPAN 306. ADVANCED COMMUNICATION. This class offers an engaging encounter
with advanced Spanish grammar by creating real-life scenarios and situations where
students can apply what they learn. Students practice how to target their discourse to specific
audiences using particular formats, for instance, presentations, interviews, formal and
informal letters, emails, and other academic and professional reports. Taught in Spanish.
Required of all Spanish majors and of those desiring teacher certification in Spanish.
Prerequisite: Spanish 202 or placement exam.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SPAN 315. PROFESSIONAL SPANISH. This course focuses on the evolution and
current state of fields such as business, healthcare, translation, and media in Spain, the
United States, and Latin America. The course will study historical and legal contexts, offer
in-depth learning and practice of specific vocabulary and structures relevant to those fields,
and develop cultural competency applicable to professional situations. This course also
provides an opportunity for students to create a portfolio of documents in Spanish that may
be used in a job search and, when possible, the completion of an applied learning project.
Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 303 or 306; or Spanish 202 may be taken
concurrently with permission from the department.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
SPAN 316. BUSINESS CULTURE IN THE HISPANIC WORLD. This course offers an
overview of the process of industrialization and the evolution of the markets of goods and
services in Latin America. Students also learn about salaries, labor contracts, and important
cases involving business ethics. The course concludes with a study of the rise of Hispanic
global brands and their impact in today’s economy. Students read biographies, articles and
short stories, and examine different types of media. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: 303 or
306; or Spanish 202 may be taken concurrently with permission from the department.
Offered periodically, spring semester only, three hours.
SPAN 317. SPACE AND URBAN DESIGN IN LATIN AMERICA. In the Latin
American plaza, many different conceptions of how public space is defined and utilized
converge, from the Mesopotamian boulevard to the markets, teocallis, and kanchas of the
indigenous civilizations of the New World. Through a journey that highlights the key ideas
and moments of the history of public space, this class examines the creation of the plaza in
Latin America and invites students to make connections with the evolution of Main Street
in the United States. Students also explore questions relative to the future of public areas
and how redevelopment efforts may affect culture and society in general. Taught in Spanish.
Prerequisite: Spanish 301.
Offered periodically, spring semester only, three hours.
SPAN 320. CONTEMPORARY SPAIN. A study of the events and ideas which have
shaped Spain with an emphasis on literary works and authors, cultural achievements and
traditions, and the evolution of socioeconomic and political structures from the 20th century
to the present. Through readings, videos, discussions and presentations, students will

264 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

develop an understanding of how Spain's rich history contributes to the daily life of
contemporary Spain (politics, religion, family, social issues and other current topics) and
influences the ways in which Spaniards view themselves and the world. Students will read
online Spanish news sources regularly. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL)
and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Spanish major. Taught in Spanish.
Prerequisite: Spanish 301 and another 300-level Spanish course.
Offered periodically, spring semester only, three hours.
SPAN 321. FOUNDATIONS OF LATIN AMERICAN SOCIETIES. An exploration of
the civilization, culture, literature, and artistic forms of pre-Columbian societies and the
changes, challenges, and opportunities brought by the processes of conquest and
colonization. Students read firsthand accounts and chronicles of this period as well as the
questions and objections raised by members of the Church to how colonization was being
implemented. The course examines the contributions of the African populations to Latin
American societies and concludes with a study of the Baroque period, including
architecture, poetry, and painting. Taught in Spanish. This course fulfills the Information
Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Spanish major. Prerequisite:
Spanish 301 and another 300-level Spanish course.
Offered periodically, fall semester only, three hours.
SPAN 325. INDEPENDENCE AND NATIONAL IDENTITIES IN LATIN
AMERICA. A study of the situation of the Spanish colonies in the 18th century and its most
recognized cultural productions. This course explores the causes and effects of
independence, the power struggles that ensued after the foundation of the Latin American
nations, and the role played by foreign powers in the establishment of national identities
during the end of the 19th century. Students read travel accounts, chronicles of everyday life,
manifestos, and the foundational narratives of the young republics, including novels and
poetry. The course concludes with the social and aesthetic conditions that produced
Modernismo, one of Latin America’s most recognized artistic periods. Taught in Spanish.
This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements
for the Spanish major. Prerequisite: Spanish 301 and another 300-level Spanish course.
Offered periodically, fall semester only, three hours.
SPAN 328. PEACE AND RECONCILIATION IN LATIN AMERICA. An exploration
of the most representative poetry, essays, film, short stories, art, and fiction of the 20th
century in Latin America. The course investigates the main causes and effects of civil
conflict in this geographical area and introduces students to the reconciliation and peace
processes that took place during the end of the last century. This course fulfills the
Information Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Spanish major.
Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 301 and another 300-level Spanish course.
Offered periodically, fall semester only, three hours.
SPAN 330. MEDIEVAL AND GOLDEN AGE SPAIN. A study of representative authors
and works of the Middle Ages, Renaissance, and Golden Age. This course explores the
development of Spanish poetry, narrative, and theater in its historical and cultural contexts.
Readings may include the Cantar de Mio Cid, El Conde Lucanor, El Libro de Buen Amor,
Jorge Manrique, Garcilaso de la Vega, Fray Luis de León, San Juan de la Cruz, El Quijote,
Lope de Vega, etc. This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive
(WI) requirements for the Spanish major. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 301 and
another 300-level Spanish course.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 265

SPAN 331. THE SPANISH ENLIGHTENMENT AND ITS AFTERMATH. A study of
Spanish Romanticism, Realism, and Generation of ’98 with readings from authors such as
Espronceda, Zorrilla, Bécquer, Rosalía de Castro, Galdós, Pardo Bazán, Blasco Ibáñez,
Unamuno, and Baroja. Nineteenth-century Spain is characterized by enormous political and
social instability. This course explores how increasing tensions between las dos Españas,
as well as other cultural developments inspired generations of authors. Taught in Spanish.
This course fulfills the Information Literacy (IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements
for the Spanish major. Prerequisite: Spanish 301 and another 300-level Spanish course
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
SPAN 335. FILM IN THE HISPANIC WORLD. An exploration of topics in film in the
Hispanic world, including history, national productions, and genres. Taught in Spanish.
Prerequisite: Spanish 301 and another 300-level Spanish course.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
SPAN 344. HISPANICS IN THE U.S. A study of the lifestyles, heritage, influence,
thoughts, and experiences of Cuban, Puerto Rican, Mexican American, Dominican, and
other Spanish speakers in the United States today. Through extensive reading, videos and
discussion, we will explore contemporary issues and topics of interest such as
demographics, immigration, discrimination, workers' rights, education, the arts, customs,
beliefs and daily life. The course will foster a greater awareness of the similarities and
differences existing between these communities, as well as their contributions to American
society. Of particular interest to students of Spanish, sociology, and political science. Taught
in Spanish. Required of all Spanish majors and those desiring teacher certification in
Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 306.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
SPAN 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Spanish.
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
SPAN 362. ASPECTS OF LANGUAGE LEARNING. A course designed to provide
opportunities to teach various grammar aspects of the Spanish language, and to examine
and implement a variety of technical aspects and resources in the foreign language
curriculum in preparation for student teaching. Teacher candidates will regularly reflect on
their teaching experiences and will develop a portfolio of materials representing their
teaching in the target language. Taught in English. Required of all students desiring teacher
certification in a foreign language.
Spring semester of the sophomore year, two hours.
SPAN 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Spanish. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
SPAN 390. STUDIES IN SPANISH. The topics of this course will vary each semester,
addressing a variety of themes in linguistics or matters of cultural, social, and historical
importance in the Hispanic world, including, but not limited to, Spain, Latin America, and
Hispanics in the United States. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 301.
Offered periodically, one, two or three hours.
SPAN 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in Spanish.
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

266 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

SPAN 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in Spanish. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
SPAN 480. INTERNSHIP IN SPANISH. This is an opportunity for Spanish majors to
participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer
and department faculty member. Most internships take place during the summer months.
Semester course, one to six hours.

Global Studies (GOBL)
These courses are designed for students who wish to gain familiarity with cultures and
literatures other than their own. Prior knowledge of a foreign language is unnecessary. None
of the courses below may be counted toward fulfillment of the requirements for a language
major.
GOBL 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in global
studies. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GOBL 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in global studies. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GOBL 290. STUDIES IN MODERN LANGUAGE. Readings and discussion of topics in
literature or language. Subject matter varies.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GOBL 300. INTERNATIONAL MANNERS AND MORES. This course equips students
to recognize and appreciate cultural differences, their origins, and how they manifest in a
variety of contexts. By exploring other customs and ways of thinking, this course prepares
students to engage respectfully and effectively on the international stage. Of special value
for students of any major who plan to work, study, and/or travel abroad, yet the principles
studied and skills gained apply just as readily to interacting with any community or
institution with a particular way of doing things.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
GOBL 310. CHICANO AND LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE. A survey with
readings in English from representative literary works of Latin American and Chicano
authors with an emphasis upon the study of Hispanic cultural identity and the integration of
Christian thought.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
GOBL 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in global
studies. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GOBL 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in global studies. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GOBL 390. STUDIES IN MODERN LANGUAGE. Readings and discussion of topics in
literature or language. Subject matter varies.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 267

GOBL 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in global
studies. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
GOBL 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in global studies. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Music
Dr. Tedford, Chair; Dr. Paparone, Assistant Chair; Dr. Carter, Dr. Erb, Dr. Hasper, Dr.
Huebert, Dr. Mueller, Dr. Munson. Additional Instructional Faculty: Ms. Agnew, Mr.
Bellassai, Dr. Billock, Mr. Cameron, Mr. Fennell, Dr. Fitch, Mr. Heasley, Mr. Heid, Ms.
Kohanski, Ms. Kubik, Mr. May, Dr. Piastro-Tedford, Mr. Scanga, Ms. Scott, Mr. Sheffer,
Mr. Tessmer, Mr. Venesky, Mrs. Young.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music—46 hours
Music Core (27 hours):
Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 203, 204, 205, 206, 219, 331, 332, 335, 476; and Music
317 or 318.
Applied Music (8 hours):
Students must complete a minimum of eight (8) credits in their primary applied
instrument. Students must take an applied lesson in their primary area every semester
they are enrolled at the college.
Ensemble (7 hours with a total of 10 occurrences):
Students must complete 7 credit hours in any combination of Music 100 Band,
Music 101 Concert Choir, or Music 102 Orchestra. An additional 3 ensembles
(credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 100, 101, 102, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students whose primary applied area is vocal, wind,
string, or percussion (not piano, organ, guitar, or harp) must participate in an
ensemble using their primary applied area every semester that they are enrolled in
the program. All other applied areas must enroll in at least one transcript-listed
ensemble each semester. Students must have a total of 10 occurrences of enrolled
ensembles (7 credited ensembles and 3 additional credit or non-credit ensembles)
to fulfill the degree requirement.
Recital Attendance Requirement:
Music majors must register each semester for Music 199, which requires attendance
at a predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals.
Recommended music electives include Music 223, 224, 230, 303, 304, 311, 325, 326, 330,
360, 403, 426, 460, and 488.
Courses that count in the Music major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “MUSI” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music/Business—63 hours
Music Core (28 hours):
Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 203, 204, 205, 206, 219, 221, 331, 332, 335; Music 476
or 480; and two courses from Music 107, 108, 207, 209, or 307.

268 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Applied Music (8 hours):
Students must complete a minimum of eight (8) credits in their primary applied
instrument. Students must take an applied lesson in their primary area every
semester they are enrolled at the college.
Ensemble (7 hours with a total of 10 occurrences):
Students must complete 7 credit hours in any combination of Music 100 Band,
Music 101 Concert Choir, or Music 102 Orchestra. An additional 3 ensembles
(credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 100, 101, 102, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students whose primary applied area is vocal, wind,
string, or percussion (not piano, organ, guitar, or harp) must participate in an
ensemble using their primary applied area every semester that they are enrolled in
the program. All other applied areas must enroll in at least one transcript-listed
ensemble each semester. Students must have a total of 10 occurrences of enrolled
ensembles (7 credited ensembles and 3 additional credit or non-credit ensembles)
to fulfill the degree requirement.
Recital Attendance Requirement:
Music majors must register each semester for Music 199, which requires attendance
at a predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals.
Business Concentration (18 hours):
Complete one concentration area choosing from:
Business: Accounting 201, 202; Finance 301; Management 103 Marketing 104;
and Statistics 131.
Management: Management 103, 457, 475, and three courses from Management
302, 304, 307, 324, 424, 433, 450, 458, 464, and 465.
Marketing: Marketing 104, 315, 411, 415, 419, and once course from Marketing
316, 412, 417, and 420.
Courses that count in the Music/Business major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “MUSI”, “ACCT”, “ECON”, “FNCE”, “MARK”, “MNGT” prefixes,
excluding MNGT 106 and FNCE 105. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music and PreK-12 Education
Certification—98 hours
The Pennsylvania Department of Education recognizes this major as an approved
program for meeting the requirements of the Instructional I (Provisional) teaching
certificate. For teacher certification requirements, see the Dept. of Education section.
Music Core (39 hours):
Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 209, 219, 221, 304 or
403, 307, 317, 318, 331, 332, 335, and 476.
Applied Music (10 hours):
Students must complete a minimum of a one-credit lesson for each semester except
the student teaching semester in their primary applied instrument (seven credits); two
(2) one-credit piano lessons or piano classes or Music 129; and one (1) one-credit
guitar lesson or guitar class.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 269

Ensemble (7 hours with a total of 10 occurrences):
Students must complete a total of 7 credit hours in Music 100 Band, Music 101
Concert Choir, and Music 102 Orchestra. Specifically, students must take a
minimum of two hours of Music 100 (comprising of one semester of Marching
Band and one semester of Concert Band); two hours of Music 101; two hours of
Music 102; and one additional hour using their primary applied area. An additional
3 ensembles (credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 100,
101, 102, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students whose primary applied area is
vocal, wind, string, or percussion (not piano, organ, guitar, or harp) must
participate in an ensemble using their primary applied area every semester that they
are enrolled in the program. All other applied areas must enroll in at least one
transcript-listed ensemble each semester. Students must have a total of 10
occurrences of enrolled ensembles (7 credited ensembles and 3 additional credit or
non-credit ensembles) to fulfill the degree requirement.
Recital Attendance Requirement:
Music education majors must register each semester, except the student teaching
semester, for Music 199, which requires attendance at a predetermined number of
faculty, senior, and student recitals.
Professional Education Requirements (42 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 488; Music Education 202, 213, 214, 313, 314, 372, 373, 435,
437; Psychology 102; Special Education 102, and 103. *Note: Students who
completed Education 205 while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete
the Education 202 requirement.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for
additional details on teacher certification requirements.
Courses that count in the Music and PreK-12 Education Certification major quality
point average (MQPA):
All courses with ‘MUSE”, “MUSI” and “EDUC” prefix; Psychology 102; Special
Education 102 and 103. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate. The minimum
QPAs to be certified are 3.00 for the cumulative CQPA and 2.75 for the MQPA.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music Performance—70 hours
Music Core (29 hours):
Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 203, 204, 205, 206, 219, 331, 332, 335, 376, 475; and
Music 317 or 318.
Music Electives (10 hours):
Students must complete a minimum of ten (10) credits of Music elective courses.
Recommended music electives include Music 223, 224, 230, 303, 304, 311, 325,
326, 330, 360, 403, 426, 460, and 488.
Recital Attendance Requirement:
Students must register each semester for Music 199, which requires attendance at a
predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals.
Performance Concentration (31 hours):
Choose one of the following options:

270 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Instrumental Music Concentration
Concentration Core:
Music 304, 328, 334, and one of Music 107, 108, 207, or 307.
Ensemble (8 hours with a total of 16 occurrences):
Students must complete 8 credit hours through participation in Music 100
Band
or Music 102 Orchestra every semester (8 semesters). An additional
8 ensembles (credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music
100, 102, 114, 115, 117, or 118. Students must have a total of 16 occurrences
of enrolled ensembles (8 credited ensembles and 8 additional credit or noncredit ensembles) to fulfill the degree requirement.
Applied Music:
Students must complete a one-hour lesson in their primary applied
instrument each semester (8 semesters).
Piano Concentration
Concentration Core:
Music 129, 224, and 327.
Ensemble (8 hours with a total of 12 occurrences):
Students must complete 8 credit hours through participation in Music 100
Band, Music 101 Concert Choir, or Music 102 Orchestra every semester (8
semesters). An additional 4 ensembles (non-credit) must be completed,
choosing from Music 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students must have a
total of 12 occurrences of enrolled ensembles (8 credited ensembles and 4
additional non-credit ensembles) to fulfill the degree requirement.
Applied Music:
Students must complete a one-hour piano lesson (Music 152) each semester
(8 semesters). Students must also complete two (2) one-half hour organ
lessons (Music 155).
Vocal Concentration
Concentration Core:
Music 209, 211, 223 (taken two times), and 333.
Ensemble (8 hours with a total of 16 occurrences):
Students must complete 8 credit hours through participation in Music 101
Concert Choir every semester (8 semesters). An additional 8 ensembles
(non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 116 or 119. Students
must have a total of 16 occurrences of enrolled ensembles (8 credited
ensembles and 8 additional non-credit ensembles) to fulfill the degree
requirement.
Applied Music:
Students must complete a one-hour voice lesson (Music 162) each semester
(8 semesters).
Courses that count in the Music Performance major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “MUSI” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to
graduate.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 271

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Music Degree in Music/Religion—72 hours
Music Core (32 hours):
Music 103, 104, 105, 106, 203, 204, 205, 206, 219, 221, 331, 332, 335, and 476;
Music 317 or 318; and choose 2 courses from Music 107, 108, 207, 209, or 307.
Applied Music (8hours):
Students must complete a minimum of eight (8) credits in their primary applied
instrument. Students must take an applied lesson in their primary area every semester
they are enrolled at the college.
Ensemble (7 hours with a total of 10 occurrences):
Students must complete 7 credit hours in any combination of Music 100 Band,
Music 101 Concert Choir, or Music 102 Orchestra. An additional 3 ensembles
(credit or non-credit) must be completed, choosing from Music 100, 101, 102, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, or 119. Students whose primary applied area is vocal, wind,
string, or percussion (not piano, organ, guitar, or harp) must participate in an
ensemble using their primary applied area every semester that they are enrolled in
the program. All other applied areas must enroll in at least one transcript-listed
ensemble each semester. Students must have a total of 10 occurrences of enrolled
ensembles (7 credited ensembles and 3 additional credit or non-credit ensembles)
to fulfill the degree requirement.
Recital Attendance Requirement:
Music majors must register each semester for Music 199, which requires attendance
at a predetermined number of faculty, senior and student recitals.
Religion Requirements (23 hours):
Music 325; Religion 211, 212, 246; Christian Ministries 122; one of Religion 221,
232, 237, 238, or 351; one of Religion 261, 341, or 362; and one of Religion 247,
251, 320, or 330.
Courses that count in the Music/Religion major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “MUSI” and “RELI” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required
to graduate.
Applied Music
Private lessons are offered in piano, organ, voice, strings, brass, woodwinds, guitar,
harp, and percussion.
Piano classes offer group instruction in a piano lab to develop skills in playing solo
literature, accompaniment, harmonization, and transposition. Classes are available at
various levels of proficiency.
Voice classes offering group instruction in the techniques of voice production are
available at beginning and intermediate levels.
Guitar classes are available at beginning and intermediate levels.
Ensemble
Credit may be earned for membership in performing organizations during each
semester. Ensembles offered for credit include Concert Band, Concert Choir, Marching
Band, and Orchestra. Other ensembles are available on a non-credit basis.
The Music Department has designated courses within the Bachelor of Music degree as
Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL). These
courses provide the necessary skills that will be needed by a professional music educator,

272 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

performer, conductor, composer, or scholar. Music 203, and 204 are designated as SI
courses. They provide the music student with skills necessary to speak in front of an
audience as part of a performance and to deliver oral presentations in the music content area.
Music 331 and 332 are designated as IL and WI courses. They provide the music student
with an introduction to music research skills encompassing use of musical scores,
recordings, traditional library sources and Internet use. Implementing the IL and WI skills
provides the necessary skills used in all areas of the music profession. Music 221 is also an
IL course. This music technology course provides the student with MIDI experience, sound
technology, and information access through the Internet.
Course Requirements for a minor in Music (18 hours)
A minor in Music will consist of Music 103, 104, 105; Music 331 or 332; three, ½ hour
juried lessons, choosing from Music 150-191; two semesters participation (for credit) in
Music 100, 101, or 102; and four additional hours of Music electives. In addition, while
enrolled as a music minor, students must register each semester for Music 198, which
requires attendance at four recitals per semester; perform in at least two student recitals
while enrolled as a music minor; and attend all Music Department meetings each semester.
Note: All prospective Music Minors must pass an audition before being admitted into the
music minor program.
Course Requirements for a minor in Musical Theatre (21 hours)
A minor in Musical Theatre will consist of Music 103, 105, 161 or 162 (minimum 3
credits); Music 222, Music or Theatre 210, Theatre 251, and six additional hours choosing
from Music 161, 162, 222, Physical Education 211, 213, 290 Jazz & Tap, Theatre 262, 320,
and 351. Note: All prospective Musical Theatre minors must pass an audition before being
admitted into the Musical Theatre minor program.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Music (MUSI)
MUSI 100. BAND. Fall Semester: The college marching band begins its year with band
camp one week before classes begin in the fall. The band performs at home football games,
selected away football games, and high school band festivals. Spring Semester: The
symphonic band performs all styles of concert literature and presents two concerts during
the semester. Auditions are held during the first week of each semester.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 101. CONCERT CHOIR. Concert choir members prepare, study, and present
choral literature. The choir performs two concerts each semester, as well as for special
campus services when applicable. Auditions are held during the first week of each semester.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 102. ORCHESTRA. The college orchestra performs a repertoire of classical as well
as modern music. The orchestra performs one concert during the fall semester and two
during the spring semester. Seating auditions are held the first week of fall semester, with
new member auditions during the first week of spring semester.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 103. MUSIC THEORY I. The first in a sequence of four music theory courses. This
course covers fundamentals of music as well as beginning musical analysis, counterpoint,
and four-part writing. Prerequisite: Music major, music minor, or with the permission of the
instructor.
Semester only, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 273

MUSI 104. MUSIC THEORY II. The second in a sequence of four music theory courses.
This course covers part-writing and analysis including all diatonic chords and tonic,
dominant, and pre-dominant functions. Prerequisite: Music 103. Semester only, two hours.
MUSI 105. AURAL SKILLS I. An aural skills and sight singing class including melodic
dictation, interval recognition, and chord identification.
Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 106. AURAL SKILLS II. A continuation of Music 105, including all intervals,
melodic dictation with large leaps, melodic and harmonic error detection, and chord
identification including I, ii, iii, IV, V, and vi triads. Prerequisite: Music 105.
Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 107. BRASS METHODS. Class instruction in the brass instruments with emphasis
on development of the instrumental program in the schools. Prerequisite: Music major and
minors only, or with the permission of the instructor.
Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 108. PERCUSSION METHODS. Class instruction in percussion instruments with
emphasis on development of the instrumental program in the schools. Prerequisite: Music
major and minors only, or with the permission of the instructor. Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 109. MUSIC THEORY FUNDAMENTALS. This course is an introduction to the
concepts and terms used in music theory that prepares students for college level music
theory. In this course students will learn to read and write music notation, apply music
theory to a piano keyboard, and construct scales and intervals.
Winter/Summer semesters, two hours.
MUSI 114. GROVE CITY COLLEGE WIND ENSEMBLE. The Wind Ensemble is a
select group of instrumental music students. This 45-member ensemble performs music of
an academic nature including contemporary, classical, and standard wind literature.
Enrollment is open to students of all majors by audition. Auditions are held during the first
week of spring semester.
Semester course, zero hours.
MUSI 115. GROVE CITY COLLEGE CHAMBER ORCHESTRA. The Chamber
Orchestra is a select group of string players and other select wind and percussion students
who must audition to join. This ensemble performs more challenging works from the string
and chamber repertoires. The group presents music in each orchestra concert and other
selected performances during the academic year. Auditions are held during the first week
of fall semester.
Semester course, zero hours.
MUSI 116. GROVE CITY COLLEGE TOURING CHOIR. The Touring Choir is
comprised of selected vocalists who are committed to striving for excellence in the choral
art. The choir sings for campus events, area churches, and takes a ten-day tour during a
spring semester break. Auditions are held during the first week of fall semester.
Semester course, zero hours.
MUSI 117. GROVE CITY COLLEGE JAZZ ENSEMBLE. The Jazz Ensemble is an
advanced instrumental performing group. This group performs Swing, Bebop, Latin,
Fusion, and other modern styles of jazz literature. Improvisational and advanced comping
skills are highly desirable for membership in this ensemble. The Jazz Ensemble performs
two college concerts per year in addition to several off-campus events. Musicians are
selected by an open audition process during the 1st and 2nd week of the fall semester.
Semester course, zero hours.

274 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

MUSI 118. GROVE CITY COLLEGE STAGE BAND. The Stage Band is an
instrumental performing group that plays less demanding literature that develops jazz style,
articulation, and phrasing. While improvisation skills are not required for this group, they
are encouraged and developed. Musicians are selected by an open audition process during
the 1st and 2nd week of the fall semester. The Stage Band typically performs two college
concerts per year.
Semester course, zero hours.
MUSI 119. GROVE CITY COLLEGE SINGERS. The Grove City College Singers is
comprised of auditioned female vocalists who are interested in singing a variety of sacred
and secular vocal literature. In addition to two formal concerts during the academic year,
the ensemble sings at a variety of campus venues, including alumni events, and a chapel
service during the fall semester. Auditions are held during the first week of fall semester.
Semester course, zero hours.
MUSI 123. PIANO CLASS I. The first in a sequence of piano classes, this course is
intended for students with no background in piano playing. Skills developed in this course
include: reading pitch and rhythm; repertoire in five-finger positions in various keys; whitekey major and minor scales in two octaves, hands separately; introduction of changes of
position (thumb crossing, finger substitution, extension, contraction, leap); I and V 6/5
chords in all major keys.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 124. PIANO CLASS II. The second in a sequence of piano courses, this course is
intended for students who have the basic skills developed in Music 123 Piano Class I. The
course includes: repertoire with easy changes of position; black-key major and minor scales
in two octaves, hands separately; chord progressions I-V in all major and minor keys;
harmonization using I and V 6/5; and sight-reading in five-finger positions. See instructor
for placement.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 125. PIANO CLASS III. The third in a sequence of piano courses, this course is
intended for students who have acquired the basic skills developed in Music 124 Piano Class
II. The course includes: intermediate level repertoire by standard composers; all major
scales, two octaves, hands together; chord progressions I-IV-V-I in major and minor keys;
harmonization using I, IV 6/4, and V 6/5 chords in major and minor keys; and sight-reading
easy pieces with minimal changes of position; and transposing of simple melodies. See
instructor for placement.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 126. PIANO CLASS IV. The fourth in a sequence of piano courses, this course is
intended for students who have attained the skills covered in Music 125 Piano Class III. The
course includes: standard repertoire at the intermediate and advanced-intermediate levels;
all major scales, two octaves, hands together; chord progressions I-IV-ii-V7-I in major and
minor keys; harmonization using I, IV 6/4, and V 6/5 in various accompaniment patterns;
sight-reading early intermediate repertoire; introduction of hymn playing, reading open
score (SATB), and playing easy accompaniments. See instructor for placement.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 129. ACCOMPANYING: VOCAL AND INSTRUMENTAL. This course
provides instruction in the art of accompanying singers and instrumentalists on the piano.
Various musical aspects are addressed, including phrasing and tempo, metrical pulse, tonal
balance, recitative, orchestra reductions, alto and tenor clefs, transposing instruments, and
musical style periods. Practical issues include page turning, proper deportment on stage, and
rehearsal techniques. Prerequisite: Piano skills above the intermediate level.
Semester only, two hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 275

MUSI 131. ORGAN CLASS. This course is for music as well as non-music majors
interested in the organ and its literature. The course also studies the history and design of
the organ as well as acoustics and liturgical architecture.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 135. GUITAR CLASS I. This is an introductory course designed to provide the
student with a means of self-expression through playing the guitar.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 137. GUITAR CLASS II. This course is for the student who has a basic knowledge
of the guitar. This course includes teaching correct methods for learning flamenco
techniques, aural and visual analysis, and performance harmonizing.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 141. BEGINNING VOICE CLASS. This course teaches vocal production and song
presentation. Individuals demonstrate and perform for class members.
Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 144. INTERMEDIATE VOICE CLASS. This course teaches vocal production and
song presentation for students with previous experience. Individuals demonstrate and
perform for class members.
Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 151-152. PRIVATE PIANO LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for
one credit (151) or one full hour for two credits (152) of individual instruction at the piano.
The level of repertoire will depend upon the technical and musical abilities of the student.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 155-156. PRIVATE ORGAN LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for
one credit (155) or one full hour for two credits (156) of individual instruction at the organ.
The student will study literature appropriate to the organ and also work on technical
development.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 161-162. PRIVATE VOICE LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for
one credit (161) or one full hour for two credits (162) of private instruction in voice. Vocal
production, language training, and performance skills for the individual singer are taught.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 163-164. PRIVATE STRING LESSON - CELLO. This course consists of onehalf hour for one credit (163) or one full hour for two credits (164) of individual instruction
on the cello. Students will improve technical skill as well as become familiar with string
literature for the cello.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 165-166. PRIVATE STRING LESSON - VIOLIN/VIOLA. This course consists
of one-half hour for one credit (165) or one full hour for two credits (166) of individual
instruction on the violin or viola. Students will improve technical skill as well as become
familiar with string literature for the violin or viola.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 167-168. PRIVATE BRASS LESSON - FRENCH HORN. This course consists
of one-half hour for one credit (167) or one full hour for two credits (168) of individual
instruction on French horn. Included in the instruction are techniques for developing
embouchure; fingerings and their alternates; and solo repertoire for the French horn.
Semester course, one or two hours.

276 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

MUSI 169-170. PRIVATE BRASS LESSON - TROMBONE. This course consists of
one-half hour for one credit (169) or one full hour for two credits (170) of individual
instruction on the trombone. Special emphasis is placed on slide positions, embouchure,
trigger fingerings, and appropriate repertoire.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 171-172. PRIVATE BRASS LESSON - TRUMPET. This course consists of onehalf hour for one credit (171) or one full hour for two credits (172) of individual instruction
on the trumpet. The student will become familiar with solo repertoire as well as fingerings
and their alternates, tone quality, embouchure, and breathing techniques.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 173-174. PRIVATE BRASS LESSON - BARITONE/TUBA. This course consists
of one-half hour for one credit (173) or one full hour for two credits (174) of individual
instruction for the student to develop proficiency on one of the lower brass instruments:
baritone/euphonium or tuba. Playing techniques; fingerings and their alternates; tone
quality; embouchure; and a variety of appropriate literature for the instrument will be
presented.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 175-176. PRIVATE BASSOON LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour
for one credit (175) or one full hour for two credits (176) of individual instruction on the
bassoon. The student will become familiar with fingerings, embouchure, reed making, and
bassoon literature.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 177-178. PRIVATE CLARINET LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour
for one credit (177) or one full hour for two credits (178) of individual instruction on the
clarinet. The student will gain mastery of the basic techniques of performance including
literature, intonation, hand position, articulation, fingerings, and embouchure.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 179-180. PRIVATE OBOE/ENGLISH HORN LESSON. This course consists of
one-half hour for one credit (179) or one full hour for two credits (180) of individual
instruction on the oboe or English horn. The student will become familiar with fingerings,
embouchure, reed making and literature.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 181-182. PRIVATE PERCUSSION LESSON. This course consists of one-half
hour for one credit (181) or one full hour for two credits (182) of individual instruction on
all of the percussion instruments. The course teaches playing techniques, fundamentals of
each instrument, and literature.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 183-184. PRIVATE FLUTE LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for
one credit (183) or one full hour for two credits (184) of individual instruction for the student
who is interested in developing knowledge of flute literature; technique; tone quality and
vibrato; fingerings; and embouchure.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 185-186. PRIVATE GUITAR LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for
one credit (185) or one full hour for two credits (186) of individual instruction for the student
wishing to concentrate on techniques and fundamentals of guitar playing. Instruction is
given on chords, harmonic structure, scales, and literature.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 187-188. PRIVATE HARP LESSON. This course consists of one-half hour for one
credit (187) or one full hour for two credits (188) of individual instruction at the harp. Must
have prior harp or piano experience.
Semester course, one or two hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 277

MUSI 189-190. PRIVATE STRING LESSON - BASS. This course consists of one-half
hour for one credit (189) or one full hour for two credits (190) of individual instruction on
the string bass. Students will improve technical skill as well as become familiar with string
literature for the bass.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 191-192. PRIVATE SAXOPHONE LESSON. This course consists of one-half
hour for one credit (191) or one full hour for two credits (192) of individual instruction on
the saxophone. The student will gain mastery of the basic techniques of performance
including literature, intonation, hand position, articulation, fingerings, and embouchure.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 193-194. PRIVATE COMPOSITION LESSON. This course consists of one-half
hour for one credit (193) or one full hour for two credits (194) of individual instruction on
musical composition. This course teaches techniques for writing for instrumental and vocal
ensembles, solo works, and small ensembles.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 195-196. PRIVATE CONDUCTING LESSON. This course consists of one-half
hour for one credit (195) or one full hour for two credits (196) of individual instruction on
musical conducting. This course teaches techniques for conducting and rehearsing bands,
choirs, or orchestras.
Semester course, one or two hours.
MUSI 198. MUSIC RECITAL ATTENDANCE FOR MUSIC MINORS. Students
fulfill this requirement by attending four recitals each semester they are enrolled as music
minors. Students minoring in music must register for this course each semester.
Semester course, zero hours.
MUSI 199. MUSIC RECITAL ATTENDANCE FOR MUSIC MAJORS. Students
fulfill this requirement by attending a predetermined number of faculty, senior and student
recitals each semester. Music majors, other than those in Music Education, must register for
this course each semester. Music Education majors must register for this course each
semester, except for the student teaching semester. The student’s academic advisor will
monitor compliance with this requirement.
Semester course, zero hours.
MUSI 203. MUSIC THEORY III. The third in a sequence of four music theory courses.
Forms and analysis are covered, including binary form, ternary form, variations, rondo and
sonata form. In addition, the elements of chromatic harmony, including harmonic
sequences, applied chords, tonicization, modulation, modal mixture, Neapolitan chords, and
augmented chords are studied. This course meets the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement
for music majors. Prerequisite: Music 103 and 104.
Semester only, two hours.
MUSI 204. MUSIC THEORY IV. The fourth in a sequence of four music theory courses.
This course covers tonal ambiguity, enharmonic modulation, altered common tone chords,
chromatic sequences, intervallic cells, and the division of the octave. Twentieth-century
topics and techniques are studied, including impressionism, neo-classicism, quartal
harmony, serialism, set theory, minimalism, and electronic techniques. This course meets
the Speaking Intensive (SI) requirement for music majors. Prerequisite: Music 203.
Semester only, two hours.
MUSI 205. AURAL SKILLS III. The third in a sequence of four courses that develop
aural recognition through sight singing and dictation. Skill sets include recognition of
harmonic and melodic intervals, modes, triads and seventh chords, and harmonic
progressions. Prerequisites: Music 105 and 106.
Semester only, two hours.

278 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

MUSI 206. AURAL SKILLS IV. The fourth in a sequence of four courses that develop
aural recognition through sight singing and dictation. Skill sets include compound intervals,
melodic dictation with modulating melodies, and progressions with seventh chords and
secondary harmony. Prerequisite: Music 205.
Semester only, two hours.
MUSI 207. WOODWIND METHODS. Class instruction in the woodwind instruments
with emphasis on the development of the instrumental program in the schools. Prerequisite:
Music Major/ Minors only or with the permission of the instructor.
Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 209 VOCAL METHODS. An overview course aimed at music education and voice
performance majors including instruction concerning the mechanics of vocal sound
production, vocal teaching methods, and identifying and correcting vocal faults in the
private studio and the choral setting. Prerequisite: Music major and minors only, or with the
permission of the instructor
Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 210. INTRODUCTION TO MUSICAL THEATRE. This class is a survey of the
development of musical theatre as a performing art form in America from 1750 to the
present. By looking at musical theatre from multiple perspectives--historical, cultural,
political, social, aesthetic – the class will explore the ways in which musicals both reflect
and embody values and trends of the cultural landscape in which they were written. Included
will be practical study of the format of the libretto and musical score in relationship to the
major musical theatre genre. Students may only receive credit for one of Music 210 or
Theatre 210.
Semester course, three hours.
MUSI 211. VOCAL DICTION. This course is aimed at music education and voice
performance majors and will include instruction concerning the International Phonetic
Alphabet; diction rules for singing in Italian, French, German, and English; and the accurate
pronunciation of sung Italian, French, English, and German. The course meetings will
consist of lecture, audio/video examples, and class participation.
Semester course, three hours.
MUSI 219. BEGINNING CONDUCTING. A study of the fundamentals of conducting
and rehearsal strategies with an emphasis on beginning instrumental and choral techniques.
Emphasis is placed on developing baton technique and hand gestures, score study, and
developing a comprehensive approach to conducting.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 221. MUSIC TECHNOLOGY. This course provides the student with music
notation experience, audio processing experience, background in music industry practices
(including music copyright) and provides experience with creating social-media rich
websites. This course meets the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for music majors.
Prerequisite: Music majors only.
Semester course, two hours.
MUSI 222. MUSICAL THEATRE WORKSHOP. This course is designed to educate
students about the musical theatre genre and all of its sub-genres through research, writing,
rehearsal, and performance, and to improve their singing, acting, and performance skills.
The main focus of class meetings will be rehearsal of assigned scenes according to
registered students’ abilities. Students will learn at least one musical theatre scene,
memorize it, block it, and perform it in a public performance at the end of the semester.
Semester course, two credits.
MUSI 223. OPERA WORKSHOP. This course will introduce the student to selected
scenes from operas. There will be a focus on scene analysis and character development

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 279

within the context of an operatic role. Class will encourage singers to integrate the vocal
and physical connection of theater with language and music. Course may be repeated.
Semester course, two hours.
MUSI 224. PIANO PEDAGOGY. This course explores aspects of the piano teaching
profession, including techniques and methods for various ability levels, repertoire selection,
and the business aspects of the career field.
Alternate years, Semester only, one hour.
MUSI 225. OPERA WORKSHOP. This course will introduce the student to selected
scenes from operas. There will be a focus on scene analysis and character development
within the context of an operatic role. Class will encourage singers to integrate the vocal
and physical connection of theater with language and music. Course may be repeated.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 230. JAZZ HISTORY. A study of the literature and culture of jazz music and jazz
musicians of the 20th and 21st centuries. The course discusses the people, history, and
compositions of jazz with a focus on the musical characteristics that define early jazz,
swing, bebop, fusion, experimental and modern jazz styles. Although a background in
music is helpful, it is not required.
Semester course, three hours.
MUSI 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in music.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MUSI 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in music. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MUSI 290. STUDIES IN MUSIC. Intensive examination of an area of music not fully
covered by regular departmental offerings. Subject matter varies each semester.
Offered periodically, semester course, one, two, or three hours.
MUSI 302. LITERATURE OF MUSIC. A non-technical survey of the great musical
compositions of Western civilization by way of classroom listening. Recommended for nonmusic majors.
Fall semester only, two hours.
MUSI 303. COUNTERPOINT. A study of the contrapuntal style and practices of
Palestrina and other masters of the sixteenth century; compositions of modal counterpoint
in two, three and four parts. Prerequisite: Music 203 or 204.
Alternate years, semester course, one hour.
MUSI 304. ORCHESTRATION. A study of the variety and characteristics of the brass,
reed, string and percussion instrument families, progressing from solo instruments through
scoring for full band and orchestra. The ability to read music and a basic understanding of
music theory is desirable but not required. Prerequisite: Music 204.
Spring semester only, two hours.
MUSI 307. STRING METHODS. Class instruction in the string instruments of the
orchestra; methods of instruction for younger orchestra, with emphasis on the principles of
tone production, intonation, bowing, and phrasing. Prerequisite: Music major and minors
only, or with the permission of the instructor.
Fall semester only, one hour.
MUSI 311. KEYBOARD HARMONY. An elective course in harmonic practice at the
keyboard. Prerequisite: Music 204.
Alternate years, semester course, one hour.

280 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

MUSI 317. ADVANCED CHORAL CONDUCTING. A course for students desiring
further experience in conducting advanced choral material. Prerequisite: Music 219.
Semester course, two hours.
MUSI 318. ADVANCED INSTRUMENTAL CONDUCTING. A course for students
desiring further experience in conducting advanced instrumental material. Prerequisite:
Music 219.
Spring semester only, two hours.
MUSI 325. CHURCH MUSIC. A historical and theological study of church music, a study
of hymns and practical application.
Spring semester only, two hours.
MUSI 324. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE MUSIC BUSINESS. This course is designed to
analyze the most important legal issues in the contemporary music industry, including how
these issues began, how they have evolved, and where they are headed. Students will explore
copyright law, including fair use and public domain, and how it affects sampling,
interpolation, and mashups. The course will explore contracts related to songwriting, 360°
deals, revenue sharing, and more, in addition to legal documents related to bands, booking,
and touring. Students will also explore contemporary and new means of creating and
disseminating music, including streaming audio/video and augmented/virtual reality, and
explore associated legal implications. Students may only receive credit for one of ENTR
324, MNGT 324, or MUSI 324.
Semester course, three hours.
MUSI 326. INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS OF MUSIC. This course is
designed as an introduction to the business of music, providing students with the latest
instruction on best practices for music creators, consumers, and facilitators working in this
field. Students will have the opportunity to learn the fundamental principles involved in the
entrepreneurial and legal dimensions of the music business, exploring the structural and
functional components of this ever-changing and rapidly growing industry. Particular
attention will be given to the challenges of starting, growing and managing a music business
in the digital era. Students may only receive credit for one of Entrepreneurship 326,
Management 326, or Music 326.
Semester course, three hours.
MUSI 327. PIANO LITERATURE. This course is a study of the literature for the piano,
beginning with works of the 17th century intended for harpsichord, and ending with the 20th
century works for the modern piano. The course includes a general overview of keyboard
music in each historical era, as well as a selective list of works from each era for in-depth
study. The historical approach highlights the development of the instrument and the
development of compositional styles, performance practices, pianistic idioms, and playing
techniques.
Semester course, two hours.
MUSI 328. WIND LITERATURE. This course has been designed to prepare instrumental
music majors to analyze, aurally and visually, the repertoire of the modern-day concert
band. Topics to be explored include, but are not limited to, various time periods, genres and
geographical influences on concert wind band composition; analysis of compositions for
various compositional elements and historical background; and compositional form,
instrumentation, pedagogy, and performance practices.
Semester course, two hours.
MUSI 330. WORLD MUSIC: A SELECTIVE SURVEY OF NON-WESTERN
MUSIC. This course will study the musical systems of Asian music, comparing and
contrasting the musical/cultural traditions of East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and
Oceania (including, but not limited to, China, Japan, Korea, Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia,
and Indonesia), and the Middle East.
Alternate years, Semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 281

MUSI 331. MUSIC HISTORY I. A survey of music in Western civilization from ancient
Greece to 1750. This course, along with Music 221 and 332, meets the Writing Intensive
(WI) and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for music majors. Prerequisite:
Humanities 301.
Semester course, three hours.
MUSI 332. MUSIC HISTORY II. A survey of music in Western civilization from 1750
to 1900. This course, along with Music 221 and 331, meets the Writing Intensive (WI) and
Information Literacy (IL) requirements for music majors. Prerequisite: Humanities 301.
Semester course, three hours.
MUSI 333. VOCAL LITERATURE. This course will provide an overview of art songs
composed in German, French, Italian, and English from the 17th through 21st centuries.
The main objective of this course is to improve students’ knowledge of core vocal literature
in the art song genre through investigation into composers’ lives, works, compositional
style, and composers’ relationships with poets and poetry. Issues of interpretation and
performance practices will also be addressed.
Semester course, two hours.
MUSI 334. ORCHESTRAL LITERATURE. This course has been designed to prepare
instrumental music majors to analyze, aurally and visually, the repertoire of the modern-day
symphony orchestra. Topics to be explored include, but are not limited to, various time
periods, genres and geographical influences on orchestral composition; analysis of
compositions for various compositional elements and historical background; and
compositional form, instrumentation, pedagogy, and performance practices.
Semester course, two hours.
MUSI 335. MUSIC HISTORY III. A survey of music in Western civilization from 1900
to the present. This course, along with Music 331 and 332, meets the Writing Intensive (WI)
and Information Literacy (IL) requirements for music majors. Prerequisite: Humanities 301.
Semester course, two hours.
MUSI 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in music.
Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MUSI 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in music. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MUSI 376. JUNIOR RECITAL. The junior recital represents a preliminary step toward
the senior capstone recital, which is the culmination of study in an area of applied
performance. The recitalist demonstrates knowledge of the technique, repertoire, and
stylistic interpretation that has been acquired in the applied area during the previous
semesters of study. The junior recital is a one-half hour public performance. Prerequisites:
Music major with junior standing.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSI 403. COMPOSITION. An elective course in music composition. This course
discusses the fundamentals of music composition in terms of melody, harmony, form,
texture and timbre with both an historical perspective (referencing masterpieces from the
12th through 21st centuries) and the opportunity to develop a personal compositional style.
The bulk of the course is devoted to work on original student compositions. Prerequisite:
Music 204.
Semester course, two hours.

282 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

MUSI 426. MUSIC MARKETING. This course will provide students with an overview
of key music marketing principles, terms, and practices, which together form the foundation
for all music marketing plans. Students will dig into the key areas of opportunities for
musicians, including publicity, advertising, promotion (online and traditional), digital
distribution, touring, licensing/synch, and radio. Students will learn what companies and
partners to work with to reach their core fans, how to communicate with them, and the ways
to leverage the changes and new opportunities that the internet offers to marketers. In
addition, they will learn marketing ideas to help them describe their vision, identify a market
need, analyze an artist’s fan base, learn from their competitors, set marketing plan goals,
and find the perfect mix of new marketing strategies ranging from branding, product, price,
place, promotion, and marketing information systems. Students may only receive credit for
one of Music 426, Marketing 426, or Entrepreneurship 426. Prerequisite: Marketing 204.
Semester course, three hours.
MUSI 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of a specialized topic(s) in music.
Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MUSI 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in music. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MUSI 475-476. SENIOR CAPSTONE RECITAL. The senior capstone recital is the
culmination of study in an area(s) of applied performance. The recitalist demonstrates
knowledge of the technique, repertoire, and stylistic interpretation that has been acquired in
the applied area(s) during the previous semesters of study. The senior recital is a public
performance. Performance majors will complete a full one-hour recital (MUSI 475) for two
credits. Music, Music/Business, Music K-12 Education, and Music/Religion majors will
complete a one-half hour recital (MUSI 476) for one credit.
Semester course, one to two hours.
MUSI 480. INTERNSHIP IN MUSIC. This is an opportunity for Music majors to
participate in a meaningful learning experience under the supervision of both an employer
and department faculty member. Most internships take place during the summer months.
Semester course, one to six hours.
MUSI 488. SEMINAR IN MUSIC. Available only by permission of the department and
the instructor involved.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
MUSI 499. HONORS IN MUSIC. A course beyond the regular requirements for the music
major. Available only to students with senior status and on an individual basis.
Semester course, one hour.

Music Education (MUSE)
MUSE 202. INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC EDUCATION. This course is designed for
students majoring in music education. This course is intended to be taken concurrently with
Foundations of Teaching (EDUC 202). This course focuses a close lens on the many facets
of music education, including the historical and philosophical foundations of music
education, special education in the music classroom, curriculum/lesson/unit planning and
assessment, as well as the political and social issues facing music educators today. This
course requires students to participate in class discussions and to write a formal paper
focusing on a topic relevant to the course. Corequisite: Education 202.
Semester course, one hour.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 283

MUSE 213. PREK-4 ELEMENTARY MUSIC PEDAGOGY. A study of music
methods, pedagogy, materials, and applications for the PreK-4 elementary music teacher.
Directed field experience in the PreK-4 schools is required. Fall semester only, two hours.
MUSE 214. MIDDLE LEVEL MUSIC PEDAGOGY. A study of music methods,
pedagogy, materials, and applications for the middle level (grades 5-8) music teacher.
Directed field experience in the middle level schools is required.
Spring semester only, two hours.
MUSE 313. SECONDARY CHORAL AND GENERAL MUSIC PEDAGOGY. A
study of music methods, pedagogy, materials, and applications for the secondary (grades 912) general and vocal music teacher. Directed field experience in the secondary choral
classroom/school is required.
Fall semester only, two hours.
MUSE 314. SECONDARY INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC PEDAGOGY. A study of music
methods, pedagogy, materials, and applications for the secondary (grades 9-12)
instrumental music teacher. Directed field experience in the secondary schools is required.
Spring semester only, two hours.
MUSE 315. MUSIC METHODS FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS. A study of music
materials and teaching methods designed to prepare the elementary and preschool teacher
to engage students in musical learning experiences. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSE 372. SECONDARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (SECOND LEVEL). An internship
course designed to permit K-12 Music majors to engage in an observational and
participatory field experience as approved by the instructor. Prerequisite: Music K-12
major.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSE 373. SECONDARY FIELD EXPERIENCE (THIRD LEVEL). An internship
course designed to permit K-12 Music majors to engage in pre-student teaching.
Participatory field experience approved by the instructor. Prerequisite: Music K-12 major.
Semester course, one hour.
MUSE 435. STUDENT TEACHING, ELEMENTARY MUSIC. Senior level Music
Education credential candidates student teach in elementary public schools an equivalency
of five days per week for seven weeks and attend one practicum session per week.
Corequisite: Music Education 437.
One-half semester course, eight hours.
MUSE 437. STUDENT TEACHING, SECONDARY MUSIC. Senior level Music
Education credential candidates student teach at the junior/middle school and/or high school
levels in the public secondary schools, an equivalency of five days per week for seven weeks
and attend one practicum session per week. Corequisite: Music Education 435.
One-half semester course, eight hours.

Charles Jr. and Betty Johnson School of Nursing
Dr. Roach, Chair; Dr. Skees.
Please reference the Nursing Program Booklet: A Supplement to The College Bulletin for
more detailed program information and requirements.

284 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Nursing—105 hours
Nursing Core (43 hours):
Nursing 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 141, 142, 143, and 144.
Nursing BSN Requirements (21 hours):
Nursing 431, 432, 433, 434, 445, 446, 447.
Major Related Requirements (41 hours):
Biology 207; Communication Arts 104; Exercise Science 215, 253, 258, 344;
Philosophy 211; Psychology 101, 103, 201; Science 203; Sociology 241; and a onecredit physical fitness (PHYE) elective course.
Courses that count in the Nursing major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “NURS” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Nursing (NURS)
NURS 100. INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL NURSING. Introduction of
professional nursing is a course that helps students explore the various aspects of nursing.
The purpose of the course is to introduce nursing concepts to nursing majors prior to the
admission to the nursing school curriculum. The course focuses on topics such as the
historical foundation of the nursing profession, roles and functions of the nurse, education
requirements, test-taking strategies, nursing process, ethical issues, cultural sensitivity, and
basic nursing competences.
Semester course, two hours.
NURS 431. COMMUNITY AND PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING. This course focuses
on the identification of health problems in terms of a community; beyond the health needs
of just one person. The purpose of the course is to introduce public and community health
issues and the associated nursing considerations that address the unique concerns of the
community as the client. The course topics include health, safety, and nutrition of the
community including vulnerable populations and accessibility to healthcare and utilization
of resources. Prerequisites: Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler
County Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN)
license.
Online, fall semester only, three hours.
NURS 432. NURSING RESEARCH / EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE. This course
focuses on the identification of nursing concerns within the clinical environment and the
implementation of a strategic plan based upon the evidence that can improve the quality of
clinical practice. The purpose of the course is to utilizes the steps of the evidence-based
practice model to improve nursing practice. The course topics include the comparison of
nursing practice models to EBP models, identification of patient problems, review of the
literature, evidence appraisal, planning, implementing, and evaluating for positive
outcomes. Prerequisites: Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County
Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.
Online, fall semester only, three hours.
NURS 433. CRITICAL THINKING IN NURSING. This course focuses on the ongoing
development of critical thinking skills within the clinical environment. The purpose of the
course is to review how to assess and promote critical thinking in the clinical practice. The
course topics include critical thinking, clinical reasoning, clinical judgment, reflection,

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 285

mindfulness, prioritizing frameworks, professional development, and accountability.
Prerequisites: Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County
Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.
Online, fall semester only, three hours.
NURS 434. ADVANCED NURSING ASSESSMENT. This course focuses on the
ongoing development of assessment skills based upon the acuity, environment, and patient
findings. The purpose of the course is to review how to perform a complete physical
assessment based upon presentation of symptoms, physical system(s) involved, health care
setting, and patient findings/acuity. The course topics include identifying the purpose of
the assessment, types of nursing assessments, head to toe assessment framework, data
collection, interpretation or findings, and clinical decision making. Prerequisites: Nursing
431, 432, 433, Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County
Community College (BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.
Online, spring semester only, three hours.
NURS 445. ADVANCED PHARMACOLOGY FOR NURSES. This course focuses on
the enhancement of the knowledge related to pharmacology, safe nursing practice in
medication administration, and patient education of pharmacologic therapies. The purpose
of the course is to review how pharmacologic therapies are utilized in nursing practice and
to promote critical thinking in the health care environment. Prerequisites: Nursing 431, 432,
433, Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County Community College
(BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.
Online, spring semester only, three hours.
NURS 446. NURSING LEADERSHIP SEMINAR. This course focuses on developing
leadership skills that directly impact the clinical care environment and foster positive patient
outcomes. The purpose of the course is to introduce both nursing clinical leadership
associated with management and leadership that can be developed and implemented at the
bedside; both which emphasize the patient and the health care team. Additional topics will
include leadership qualities and styles, accountability, self-care, professional development,
and management structures. Prerequisites: Nursing 431, 432, 433, 434, 445, Associate
Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County Community College (BC3) and a
current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.
Online, spring semester only, three hours.
NURS 447. NURSING CAPSTONE. This course focuses on the completion of a senior
project which is a culmination of liberal arts education at GCC, the Associate of Applied
Science Education of BC3, and the initiation into the nursing profession. The purpose of
this course is to build on the concepts and knowledge gained from previous nursing courses
allowing for the application of theories and concepts associated with nursing leadership,
nursing research, and management of care. Prerequisites: Nursing 431, 432, 433, 434, 445,
Associate Nursing Degree in Applied Science from Butler County Community College
(BC3) and a current unencumbered Registered Nurse (RN) license.
Online, spring semester only, three hours.

Physics
Dr. Wolinski, Chair; Dr. Brower, Dr. Clem, Dr. Marsch, Dr. Wagner. Additional
Instructional Faculty: Mr. Fugate.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Physics—81 hours

286 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Physics Core (32 hours):
Physics 101, 102, 135, 210, 234, 288, 303, 305, 321, 431, and Astronomy 207.
Physics Electives—choose 12 hours from:
Physics 304, 310, 340, 401 or 402, 421, or 442.
Technical Core requirements (26 hours):
Chemistry 105; Computer 141; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262, 263; and Physics
242.
Technical Electives (11 hours):
Choose eleven hours from any 300-level Astronomy courses; any Biology courses;
Chemistry 112 and 114; any 200- or 300-level Chemistry, Computer Science,
Electrical Engineering, Engineering, or Mechanical Engineering courses; any 300level Mathematics courses; Physics 260, 270, 360, 370, 470; or any additional
courses approved by the Department Chair.
Courses that count in the Physics major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “PHYS” and “ASTR” prefixes. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required
to graduate.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Physics and Secondary
Education Certification—116-118 hours
Physics Core (32 hours):
Physics 101, 102, 135, 210, 234, 288, 303, 305, 321, 431, and Astronomy 207.
Physics Electives—choose 12 hours from:
Physics 304, 310, 340, 401 or 402, 421, or 442.
Technical Core requirements (26 hours):
Chemistry 105; Computer 141; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262, 263; and Physics
242.
Technical Electives (6-8 hours):
Choose six to eight hours from Astronomy 310; any Biology courses; Chemistry 112
and 114; Chemistry 345; Computer Science 220, 222, 244, 246, 252, 340, 342, 350;
any engineering courses (except Engineering 156, 210, 402 or Electrical Engineering
201, 251); any 300- or 400-level Mathematics courses; Physics 270, 370, 470, 486;
or any additional courses approved by the Department Chair. A maximum of three
hours from independent research may count toward this requirement.
Education requirements (40 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Courses that count in the Physics and Secondary Education Certification quality point
average (MQPA):
All courses with “PHYS” and “ASTR” prefixes. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and
MQPA of 2.75 are required for certification.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 287

Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for additional
details on teacher certification requirements.
Course Requirements for a Bachelor of Science Degree in Physics and General Science
Secondary Education Certification—97-98 hours
Physics Core (26 hours):
Physics 101, 102, 135, 210, 234, 288, 321, 486, and Astronomy 207.
Technical Core requirements (26-27 hours):
Chemistry 105; Computer 141; Geology 201 or Science 204; Mathematics 161, 162,
261; and Biology 101 or Science 202 .
Technical Electives (6 hours):
Choose six hours from any 300-level Astronomy course; Biology 102; Chemistry
112 and 114; any Computer Science course numbered 215 or higher (excluding
Computer Science 260, 270, 290, 360, 370, 390, 460, 470, 480, and 488);
Mathematics 262; Mechanical Engineering 211, 212, 214; Physics 242, 270, 303,
305, 310, 340, 370, 421, 431, 470; or any additional courses approved by the
Department Chair. A maximum of three hours from independent research may count
toward this requirement.
Education requirements (40 hours):
Education 202*, 203, 204, 215, 317, 371, 375, 450, 488; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 102 and 103. *Note: Students who completed Education 205
while dual enrolled must take Education 206 to complete the Education 202
requirement.
Courses that count in the Physics and General Science Secondary Education
Certification major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “PHYS”, “ASTR”, and “EDUC” prefixes; Psychology 102; and
Special Education 101. A minimum CQPA of 3.00 and MQPA of 2.75 are required for
certification.
Students should reference the Department of Education section of the Bulletin for additional
details on teacher certification requirements.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Physics/Computer—87-88
hours
Physics/Computer Core requirements (40 hours):
Physics 101, 102, 135, 234, 242, 288, 303, 321, 442; Astronomy 207; Computer
Science 141, 244, and 342.
Electrical Engineering 441 (required for Physics/Computer Hardware Option)
/Computer Science 424 (required for Physics/Computer Software Option).
Technical Core requirements (20 hours):
Chemistry 105; Mathematics 161, 162, 261, 262, and 263.
Hardware or Software Option
Choose one of the following options:

288 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Computer Hardware option (26-27 hours):
Computer Hardware Requirements (20 hours): Electrical Engineering 201, 202,
204, 251, 252, 306, 310, and Computer Science 220.
Technical Electives (6-7 hours): Choose two of the following: Physics 304, 305,
340, 401 or 402, 421, 431; Astronomy 310; or Mathematics 213.
Computer Software option (28-30 hours):
Computer Software Requirements (25-27 hours): Computer Science 220, 222,
325, 340, 350; Physics 210; and two of Electrical Engineering 204; Computer
Science 480 or Physics 270, 370, 470 (limit 3 hours); Computer Science 314 or
any 400-level computer course; or Mathematics 213 or 222*.
Technical Electives (3 hours): Choose one of the following: Physics 304, 305,
340, 421, 431, or Astronomy 310.
* Students who elect Mathematics 213 and 222 will also receive a minor in
Mathematics.
Courses that count in the Physics/Computer major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “PHYS”, “ASTR”, “COMP”, and “ELEE” prefixes, MATH 222. A
minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Course Requirements for a minor in Physics (18 hours)
A minor in Physics will consist of Physics 101, 102, 135, 234, and six hours from
Physics 303, 305, 310, 431 or 442 (Electrical Engineering majors may not take Physics
305).
Course Requirements for a minor in Astronomy (21 hours)
A minor in Astronomy will consist of Physics 101 or 121; Physics 102 or 122; and
Astronomy 206, 207, 301, and 310.
Course Requirements for a minor in Medical Physics (19 hours)
A minor in Medical Physics will consist of Physics 101 or 121; Physics 102 or 122;
and Physics 234, 321, 401, and 402.
Training in both oral and written communication skills is an oft-neglected part of the
undergraduate science curriculum. At the same time, communicating one’s ideas and results
in a clear and coherent manner is an essential skill for a scientist, requiring clarity of thought
and expression. In addition, a scientist must know how to find, analyze, and use information
developed by others in their field. To address these concerns, all physics majors are required
to take Physics 288 as a Writing Intensive (WI) course and Physics 321 as a Speaking
Intensive (SI) and Information Literacy (IL) course. In tandem, these courses provide
focused, discipline specific training in the areas of oral and written communications as well
as the ability to gather, analyze and use information within the field of physics.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Physics (PHYS)
PHYS 101. GENERAL PHYSICS I-ENGINEERING. A calculus-based study of
mechanics including kinematics, Newton’s laws of motion, work, energy, linear
momentum, rotational motion, angular momentum, gravity, equilibrium, fluids, oscillations,

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 289

traveling and standing waves. Three lectures and one lab per week. Students may not receive
credit for both Physics 101 and 121. Corequisite: Mathematics 161.
Semester course, four hours.
PHYS 102. GENERAL PHYSICS II – ENGINEERING. A survey of the fundamental
principles of electric fields and potentials, circuit theory, magnetism, Maxwell’s equations,
light, interference, and diffraction. Three lectures and one lab per week. Prerequisite:
Physics 101. Corequisite: Mathematics 162.
Semester course, four hours.
PHYS 121. COLLEGE PHYSICS I. A study of mechanics at the pre-calculus level with
applications to the life sciences. Topics include kinematics, Newton’s laws, work, energy,
momentum, angular motion, fluids, oscillations, and gravity. Three lectures and one lab per
week. Students may not receive credit for both Physics 101 and 121.
Fall semester only, four hours.
PHYS 122. COLLEGE PHYSICS II. A study of electricity, magnetism, geometric and
physical physics at the pre-calculus level with applications to the life sciences. Topics
include electric field and potential, DC circuits, magnetism, induction, geometric and
physical optics, relativity, and nuclear physics. Three lectures and one lab per week.
Prerequisite: Physics 121.
Spring semester only, four hours.
PHYS 135. HORIZONS IN PHYSICS. Discussion of current topics in physics. Since
scientific journals will provide much of the content for this course, students will learn how
to acquire and interpret articles from scholarly publications. In addition, students will be
required to attend presentations by physicists actively engaged in research, as well as field
trips to academic and industrial laboratories in the area. This course is open to all students
but, in the event that the class becomes full, preference is given to physics majors.
Fall semester only, one hour.
PHYS 210. ELECTRONICS. An introduction to electronics emphasizing those topics
most useful to the experimental physicist. As such, the physics of active and passive devices
(resistors, capacitors, inductors, diodes, transistors, sensors, etc.) will be discussed along
with practical circuit applications (filters, operational amplifiers, voltage regulators,
oscillators, timers, etc.). The bulk of this course is devoted to analog electronics, but digital
electronics is discussed briefly at the end of the semester. Three hours of lecture and three
hours of lab per week. Prerequisite: Physics 102.
Fall semester only, four hours.
PHYS 234. MODERN PHYSICS. An introduction to modern physics. Two essential areas
will be covered: the special theory of relativity and the origins of quantum mechanics.
Prerequisite: Physics 102; or Physics 122 and Mathematics 162.
Spring semester only, three hours.
PHYS 242. INTRODUCTION TO THEORETICAL PHYSICS. An introduction to
problem-solving techniques used to describe physical phenomena. Includes topics from
complex analysis, probability theory, vector calculus, Fourier series and transforms, matrix
algebra, differential equations (ordinary and partial), and special functions. Prerequisites:
Mathematics 261 and Physics 102, or by permission.
Spring semester only, three hours.
PHYS 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in physics.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

290 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

PHYS 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in physics. Freshman or sophomore standing, permission of the department, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PHYS 288. INTERMEDIATE LABORATORY. This course is designed to teach
students the process of scientific investigation, transitioning them from introductory, cookbook labs to actual experimental design and execution. Experiments cover a variety of topics
from classical and modern physics including propagation of error, waves, thermodynamics,
optics, spectrophotometry, speed of light, and the photoelectric effect. This course is
designed to fulfill the requirements for a Writing Intensive (WI) course in the physics major.
Spring semester only, two hours.
PHYS 303. MECHANICS I. The application of mathematical methods to the study of the
general motion of particles; Newtonian and Lagrangian mechanics; Hamilton’s equations;
and selected applications. Prerequisites: Physics 101 and either Math 262 or Physics 242,
or consent of instructor.
Fall semester only, three hours.
PHYS 304. MECHANICS II. A continuation of Mechanics I. Topics covered include
dynamics of a system of particles, motion in a non-inertial reference frame, dynamics of
rigid bodies, and coupled oscillations and waves. Prerequisite: Physics 303.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
PHYS 305. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. A study of the fundamental principles
of electricity and magnetism. Topics covered include vector calculus, electric field and
potential, polarization, electric displacement, linear dielectrics, magnetostatics, and
electrodynamics. Prerequisites: Physics 102 and Physics 242 or Mathematics 262.
Fall semester only, three hours.
PHYS 310. OPTICS. A study of electromagnetic waves. Topics covered include the
Maxwell equations, geometric optics, interference, diffraction, polarization, coherence,
holography, and topics from nonlinear optics. Prerequisites: Physics 305 or Electrical
Engineering 304.
Spring semester only, three hours.
PHYS 321. RADIATION LABORATORY. An experimental study of the detection and
characteristics of alpha, beta, gamma, and neutron radiation. One lecture and one lab per
week. Physics 321 is designed to fulfill the requirements for a Speaking Intensive (SI) and
Information Literacy (IL) course in the Physics major. Prerequisite: 234 or consent of the
department
Spring semester only, two hours.
PHYS 340. THERMODYNAMICS AND STATISTICAL MECHANICS. A study of
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics that includes topics such as heat and work; ideal
gases; equipartition of energy, entropy, Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac, and Bose-Einstein
distributions; and applications to heat engines, refrigeration, chemical equilibrium, phase
transitions, blackbody radiation, and properties of solids. Prerequisites: Physics 234, and
242, or permission of the instructor.
Fall semester only, three hours.
PHYS 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for independent study of
specialized topics in physics. Junior standing, permission of the department, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.
PHYS 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in physics. Junior standing, permission of the department, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 291

PHYS 390. STUDIES IN PHYSICS. Examination of different areas in the field of physics
not offered by regular course work. Subject matter varies each semester.
Semester course, three hours.
PHYS 401. RADIATION AND HEALTH PHYSICS. A study of radiation therapy
principles in medicine. Topics include how radiation is generated and how it interacts with
human tissue, dose limits and how they are calculated, radiation safety, and electron and
proton beam therapy. Prerequisite: Physics 234 or permission of instructor.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
PHYS 402. MEDICAL IMAGING AND DIAGNOSTIC PHYSICS. This course serves
as an introduction to x-ray radiography and advanced diagnostic medical imaging
techniques like x-ray tomography (CAT), ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, and
positron emission tomography. Prerequisite: Physics 234 or permission of instructor.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
PHYS 421. ADVANCED TOPICS. An in-depth course in an advanced physics topic (or
topics) chosen by the instructor. Content can vary from year to year but may be include
areas such as general relativity, nuclear physics, elementary particle physics, solid-state
physics, nanotechnology, etc. Prerequisites: Physics 234; and Mathematics 262 or Physics
242.
Fall semester only, three hours.
PHYS 431. QUANTUM MECHANICS. A study of wave-particle duality, the Bohr atom,
and the development of quantum mechanics and its application to the periodic table and the
nucleus and solving the Schrödinger equation for several 1D systems and for the Bohr atom.
Prerequisites: Physics 234, 303, and Mathematics 262 or Physics 242.
Spring semester only, three hours.
PHYS 442. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS IN PHYSICS. An advanced course in the
solution of physics problems using computer programming and numerical techniques for
ordinary differential equations, partial differential equations, algebraic equations, spectral
analysis, optimization, and numerical integration. Corequisites: Computer 141; Physics 303;
and Mathematics 262 or Physics 242. Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
PHYS 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. An opportunity for independent study of
specialized topics in physics. Senior standing, permission of the department, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.
PHYS 470. PHYSICS RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised research in
physics. Senior standing, permission of the department, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two, or three hours.
PHYS 480. INTERNSHIP IN PHYSICS. Selected students participate in individual field
experiences under the supervision of an on-site manager and a department faculty member.
Requirements include evaluation by the on-site manager, a journal of the internship
experience, a final written paper, and an oral presentation describing the completed work.
Prerequisite: Permission of the faculty sponsor and coordination with the internship site.
Semester course, one to six hours.
PHYS 486. PHYSICS EDUCATION SEMINAR. This seminar assists students in their
understanding of the basic principles of physics and helps them to learn teaching methods
unique to physics. Students will discuss modern research-based educational approaches in

292 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

physics and assist in instructing the Science 201 class. Prerequisite: Physics education
majors only, or permission of the instructor.
Semester course, three hours.
PHYS 488. SEMINAR IN PHYSICS. An opportunity for a student to undertake a project
in an area of physics of special interest. Project approval and amount of credit to be given
requires consent of the department.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PHYS 499. HONORS IN PHYSICS RESEARCH. Seniors who have shown special
aptitude in physics may, with the consent of the Department of Physics, undertake
supervised physics research. A research paper and a formal presentation are required to
receive Honors credit. Not to exceed two hours each semester.
Semester course, one or two hours.

Astronomy (ASTR)
ASTR 206. INTRODUCTION TO SKY MOTIONS AND PLANETS. An introduction
to modern astronomy with an emphasis on the motions of the sun, moon, and stars in the
sky; the solar system; and extrasolar planets. Includes observations with the campus
observatory and an observational project. Open to all students.
Fall semester only, three hours.
ASTR 207. INTRODUCTION TO STARS, GALAXIES, AND COSMOLOGY. An
introduction to modern astronomy with an emphasis on the nature of the universe and
objects within it. Topics include the properties of stars, the stellar life cycle, galaxies, and
cosmology. Includes an observational project. Open to all students.
Spring semester only, three hours.
ASTR 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
astronomy. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ASTR 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in astronomy. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ASTR 301. OBSERVATIONAL ASTRONOMY. Methods employed in modern optical
observational astronomy. Topics covered include spherical trigonometry, time and
coordinate systems, astronomical instruments, photometry, and spectroscopy. Students
make extensive use of the campus observatory and the Grove City College observatory near
Edinboro, Pennsylvania. Prerequisites: Astronomy 206 and 207.
Alternate years, fall semester only, four hours.
ASTR 310. INTRODUCTION TO ASTROPHYSICS. A calculus-based introduction to
modern astrophysics. Topics covered include orbital mechanics, light and matter
interactions, stellar atmospheres, stellar interiors, stellar evolution, the interstellar medium,
the Milky Way, other galaxies, and cosmology. Prerequisites: Astronomy 206 and 207;
Mathematics 161; Physics 101 or 121; and Physics 102 or 122.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
ASTR 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
astronomy. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 293

ASTR 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in astronomy. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ASTR 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
astronomy. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
ASTR 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in astronomy. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Political Science
Dr. Coulter, Chair; Dr. Kengor, Dr. Stanton, Dr. Verbois. Additional Instructional Faculty:
Dr. Berry, Mr. McNulty.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Political Science—43 hours
Core Requirements (19 hours):
Political Science 101, 104, 201, 204, 205, and 277.
Political Science Clusters (12 hours):
Choose two courses from two of the following clusters for a total of 12 hours:
American Politics:
Political Science 304, 305, 306, 308, 309, 317, 318, or 319.
Comparative/International Relations:
Political Science 302, 303, 310, 311, 333, 335, 341, 342, or 344.
Political Theory:
Political Science 350, 351, 354, 355, 356, or 357.
Political Science Electives (12 hours):
Choose twelve additional hours of 300-400 level Political Science electives. Note:
Completion of Political Science 481 (12 credits) will not fulfill the Political Science
Electives in full as only six credits of internship may apply toward the major
requirements. The remaining six credits will count as general elective hours.
Courses that count in the Political Science major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “POLS” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Effective communication and research skills are indispensable for career advancement
in the variety of fields available to Political Science majors, including law, government at
all levels, and business. Thus, the Political Science Department has incorporated
Information Literacy (IL), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Writing Intensive (WI) instruction
in Political Science 277.
Recommended electives:
Students planning to do graduate work in Political Science are encouraged to acquire
backgrounds in mathematics and statistics. Courses in computer literacy are also
recommended. All Ph.D. programs require competency in at least two foreign languages as
well. Students pursuing law school are advised to take Accounting courses, Business Law,

294 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Constitutional Law, and Symbolic Logic. A broad background in the social sciences, history,
and the humanities is also recommended.
Course Requirements for a minor in Political Science (18 hours)
A minor in Political Science will consist of Political Science 104, 201, 204, 205, and
six hours of Political Science electives.
Course Requirements for a minor in National Security Studies (18 hours)
A minor in National Security Studies will consist of Political Science 302, 303, 335,
History 336; and six hours from Political Science 310, 341, 342, 344.
Course Requirements for a minor in Pre-Law (18 hours)
A minor in Pre-Law will consist of Political Science 317, 318 (or History 317, 318);
Political Science 351 or Philosophy 340; Philosophy 211; and six hours from Accounting
201; Communication Arts 104; Management 303, 304, 308; Philosophy 201; Political
Science 305, 308; Sociology 233, 331.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Political Science (POLS)
POLS 101. FOUNDATIONS OF POLITICAL SCIENCE. A review of the principal
methods of studying politics, the enduring issues of politics, and main institutions of
selected governments in the world today.
Semester course, three hours.
POLS 104. INTERNATIONAL POLITICS. An analysis of the growth of national states
and the factors that determine their behavior in international affairs. Particular attention is
given to problems of collective security, balance of power, foreign policy, and political
economy.
Semester course, three hours.
POLS 111. UNDERSTANDING THE U.S. CONSTITUTION. A study of the origins
and formation of the US Constitution and essential Constitutional features, such as
federalism and separation of powers. Attention will be given to the rights and
responsibilities of citizens in the U.S. constitutional order. Spring semester only, one hour.
POLS 201. COMPARATIVE POLITICS. A selective study of major governments of the
industrialized and non-industrialized world. Emphasis placed on the tools of comparative
analysis and their application to various nations in the developed and developing world.
Fall semester only, three hours.
POLS 204. AMERICAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. A survey of national political
institutions including Congress, the Supreme Court, the presidency, public bureaucracy, and
a review of selected topics in public policy.
Semester course, three hours.
POLS 205. POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY AND THE CHRISTIAN INTELLECTUAL
TRADITION. This course introduces students to the study of political philosophy through
an examination of selected works of political philosophers, theologians, and political actors
as those works consider the intersection of theology and political life.
Semester course, three hours.
POLS 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in political
science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 295

POLS 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in political science. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and
a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
POLS 277. RESEARCH METHODS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. An introduction to
approaches and methods of political science research, with an emphasis on research design,
data collection, interpretation, and the use of computers in the discipline. This course is
taught with a lab. This course fulfills the Writing Intensive (WI), Information Literacy (IL),
and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the Political Science major.
Semester course, four hours.
POLS 302. NATIONAL SECURITY. A review of American national security policy
including coverage of defense policy, military deployments, and threat assessments.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
POLS 303. GREAT POWER POLITICS. An examination of Great Power Politics with
an emphasis on twentieth century developments. The course covers the sources of national
strength, relations of great powers to one another and minor powers, the rise and decline of
nations, and the end of the Cold War. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 304. THE AMERICAN PRESIDENCY. A study of the major functions of the
Presidency, with an emphasis on the Office’s historical development and its role in
American national government.
Fall semester only, three hours.
POLS 305. AMERICAN CONGRESS. An examination of the major functions and
processes of Congress, with an emphasis on presidential-congressional relationships and the
formation of public policy.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 306. POLITICAL PARTIES, INTEREST GROUPS, AND ELECTIONS. An
overview of the functions of American political parties with special attention to the role of
interest groups in the policy process. Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 308. PUBLIC POLICY. A study of the main issues surrounding current topics in
public policy, dealing with welfare and poverty, energy, environment, labor, business,
agriculture, consumer policies, and selected issues in foreign policy. Variable credit in
election years.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 309. STATE AND LOCAL POLITICS. An examination of state and local
governments and public policies. Topics include federalism, state constitutions, governors,
legislatures, judiciary, politics of local governments, and policy debates surrounding local
concerns as well as unfunded mandates and meeting federal guidelines.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 310. U.S. FOREIGN POLICY. This course offers a general introduction to the
traditions and theories of the U.S. foreign policy. The course will cover the traditions and
theories of U.S. foreign policy; processes of policy formulation; and the roles of the
President, Congress, the State Department, and other government agencies.
Semester course, three hours.
POLS 311. HUMAN RIGHTS. This course is a study of the ideological and theological
foundations of human rights and the roles of states, international organizations, and nongovernmental organizations in creating and managing human rights regimes.
Semester course, three hours.

296 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

POLS 317. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES I. A study of the
development of the United States Constitution through use of the case study method. This
course especially focuses on the constitutional powers of the three branches of government,
the relationship between state and federal governmental powers, and property rights and
economic liberties. Students may not receive credit for both Political Science 317 and
History 317.
Fall semester only, three hours.
POLS 318. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES II. A study of the
development of the United States Constitution through the use of the case study method.
This course especially focuses on the idea of equality and the equal protection clause, due
process, privacy and liberty rights, freedom of speech, press and religion and other Bill of
Rights issues. Students may not receive credit for both Political Science 318 and History
318.
Spring semester only, three hours.
POLS 319. PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION. A study of the development, operation, and
politics of administrative agencies and the public bureaucracy.
Semester course, three hours.
POLS 333. MAJOR EUROPEAN GOVERNMENTS. A comparative study of European
politics with special emphasis on the major governments of Western Europe and the
emerging republics of the former Soviet Union. Problems of European integration and the
development of democracy in Eastern Europe are stressed.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 335. TERRORISM AND COUNTER-TERRORISM. A survey of terrorism from
ancient times to the present with an emphasis on current international groups like al Qaeda,
Hezbollah and Hamas, as well as domestic terrorist groups like the Aryan Nations and Ku
Klux Klan.
Offered periodically, three semester hours.
POLS 341. AFRICAN POLITICS. A comparative overview of the politics of major
African states, with emphases upon the influences of the colonial past, problems of political
development, relations with the major powers, the geo-strategic importance of selected
countries.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
POLS 342. MIDDLE EASTERN POLITICS. A survey of major powers of the Middle
East with emphases on problems of the colonial past, political development, tribal and
religious influences, regional conflicts, and global strategic significance.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
POLS 344. ASIAN POLITICS. A study of the major powers of Asia, with special
reference to China, Japan and Korea, stressing problems of political and economic
development, along with regional conflicts.
Alternate years, spring semester only, three hours.
POLS 350. AMERICAN POLITICAL THOUGHT. A survey of the foundations of
American civilization from the origins of the republic to the present time. Special attention
is given to current debates surrounding culture wars and their impact on public policy.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 351. PHILOSOPHY OF LAW. This course commonly examines such topics as the
nature of law, the relationship of law to morality, the problem of judicial interpretation,
justice, and rights.
Alternate years, semester course, three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 297

POLS 354. MARXISM. A study of Marxism from its beginnings to its development into
twentieth century totalitarianism by Lenin and his successors.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 355. CLASSICAL POLITICAL THOUGHT. A study of the principle theorists
and schools of thought about politics from the Pre-Socratics through the Middle Ages.
Fall semester only, three hours.
POLS 356. MODERN POLITICAL THOUGHT. A survey of the main political thinkers
from Machiavelli to the present. The contributions of political theorists to the development
of civilization are stressed.
Spring semester only, three hours.
POLS 357. POLITICAL IDEOLOGIES. A survey of modern ideologies including
treatments of liberalism, conservatism, fascism, communism, democratic socialism, and
Third World ideologies. Feminism, environmentalism, and related modern ideologies are
also covered.
Offered periodically, semester course, three hours.
POLS 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Directed research on an individual basis. Junior
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
POLS 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in political science. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
POLS 390. STUDIES IN POLITICS. A focused study of selected topics in politics and
political science, the content of which varies each semester. Semester course, three hours.
POLS 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Directed research on an individual basis. Senior
standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
POLS 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in political science. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
POLS 480. INTERNSHIP IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. This course offers practical
experience in the field of politics and political science. Semester course, one to six hours.
POLS 481. WASHINGTON INTERNSHIP. This program allows students to spend a
semester in Washington working in a government office or for a private organization that
deals regularly with public policy matters. For more information, see the "Washington
Internship Program" section under General Education and Degree Programs.
Semester course, twelve hours.
POLS 488. SEMINAR IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. Special topics in political science,
the content of which varies each semester. Open to majors and non-majors with department
approval.
Semester course, three hours.
POLS 499. HONORS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. Open only to qualified majors with
department approval.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

298 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Psychology, Social Work, and Sociology
Dr. Horton, Chair; Dr. D. Ayers, Dr. M. E. Bright, Dr. Conway, Ms. Hollenberger, Dr. K.
Homan, Dr. Hosack, Dr. Throckmorton, Dr. Welton. Additional Instructional Faculty: Dr.
Houk, Mr. Fleske..
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Psychology—48 hours
Core Requirements (26 hours):
Psychology 101, 201, 204, 208, 301, 310, 316, and 404.
Psychology Clusters (18 hours):
Choose two courses from each of the following clusters:
Experimental: Psychology 306, 318, or 401.
Clinical: Psychology 206, 207, or 312.
Developmental: Psychology 209, 211, or 322.
Major-Related Requirements (4 hours):
Biology 101 or Science 202. (If Science 202 is taken, the other science course taken
to fulfill the general science requirement cannot be a Biology course or SCIC 204.)
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Psychology—54 hours
Core Requirements (42 hours):
Psychology 101, 201, 204, 208, 301, 310, 316, 318, 319, 401, 404, and nine hours of
Psychology electives (excluding Psychology 103).
Major-Related Requirements (12 hours):
Biology 101, 102, and 233.
Courses that count in the Psychology major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “PSYC” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Courses recommended for psychology majors include Philosophy 161 and 201.
Students are encouraged to take an internship. No credit in independent study or internship
may be counted toward the major requirements. Those students planning to do graduate
work in psychology are encouraged to take Psychology 318, 401; Philosophy 161, and 201.
Psychology majors, regardless of whether they pursue graduate studies or enter the
work force immediately following graduation, need to be good writers and speakers and
need to know how to find, analyze, and use information. To that end, Psychology 204 and
404 are Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), and Information Literacy (IL)
courses, designed to provide the necessary skills for psychology majors to be good
producers and consumers of psychological information as well as effective communicators
of that knowledge.
Course Requirements for Bachelor of Science Degree in Social Work—53 hours
Core Requirements (50 hours):
Psychology 201, 204; Social Work 101, 205, 264, 280, 302, 305, 310, 342, 364, 382,
410, 420, 421, 425, and 426.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 299

Social Work Electives (3 hours):
One course from Economics 102, Psychology 208, 312, or Sociology 208.
Courses that count in the Social Work major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “SOCW” prefix. A minimum MQPA of 2.50 is required by fall of the
sophomore year or upon acceptance into the Social Work Program and must be maintained
until graduation. Transfer students and students changing their major after the first semester
of the sophomore year will be evaluated as part of the application process into the Social
Work Program. Students on academic probation will be evaluated after one semester and
will be dismissed from the Social Work program if their MQPA remains below a 2.50.
SOCW 410 has been designated as the Writing Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI),
and Information Literacy (IL) course for Social Work majors.
The Social Work Program aims to prepare students for competent and compassionate,
entry-level, generalist social work practice within the broader context of a Christian, liberal
arts perspective. The Social Work Program has been accredited by the Council of Social
Work Education.
Course requirements for Bachelor of Arts Degree in Sociology—38 hours
Core Requirements (14 hours):
Sociology 101, 201, 377, 452, and 473.
Elective Requirements (15 hours):
Fifteen hours from any additional sociology courses including the following:
Sociology 103, 203, 208, 221, 233, 241, 251, 260, 270, 290, 308, 312, 314, 315,
321, 331, 356, 360, 370, 375, 390, 460, 470, 480, and 499.
Major-Related Courses (9 Hours):
Economics 101; Psychology 201, 208.
Courses that count in the Sociology major quality point average (MQPA):
All courses with “SOCI” prefix; ECON 101; PSYC 201 and 208. A minimum MQPA
of 2.00 is required to graduate.
Sociology majors are provided with focused, discipline-specific instruction in
professional writing by taking the Writing Intensive (WI) course Sociology 377 Social
Research Methods, and in professional speaking by taking the Speaking Intensive (SI)
course Sociology 452 Sociology Colloquium. Information Literacy (IL) instruction is also
incorporated in Sociology 377, focusing on knowledge and use of electronic information
technology and resources, critically assessing this information, and teaching skills that
explore scholarly research and publishing processes within the field of Sociology.
Course requirements for a minor in Family Studies (19 hours)
A minor in Family Studies will consist of Psychology 201; Sociology 312; one course
from Psychology 204, Political Science 277, or Sociology 377; and three courses from
Psychology 209, 211, 322, or Sociology 251.
Course Requirements for a minor in Psychology (18 hours)
A minor in Psychology will consist of 18 hours of Psychology courses, including
Psychology 101, and excluding Psychology 102. Exercise Science 203 Exercise and Sport
Psychology may also be counted toward the Psychology minor.

300 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Course requirements for a minor in Social Work (21 hours)
A minor in Social Work will consist of Social Work 101, 264, 272, 342, 382, and six
hours from Sociology 203, 208, Social Work 205, 280, 305, or Psychology 312.
Course requirements for a minor in Sociology (19 hours)
A minor in Sociology will consist of Sociology 101, 377, 473, and nine additional hours
of Sociology coursework.
Students are expected to contact their advisors for a detailed schedule of courses
recommended to meet requirements for a major.

Psychology (PSYC)
PSYC 101. FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE. This course is
designed to introduce the student to the field of psychology, which is defined as the
scientific study of behavior and mental processes. Like other sciences, psychology seeks to
explain, predict, and control the events it studies. Students will be exposed to the important
theories, methods, and landmark findings that have helped to shape psychology as a field of
inquiry. An integral focus of the course will be a consideration of how psychology can
contribute to the synthesis of a consistent Christian worldview.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 102. EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY. A consideration of those aspects of
psychology which form the basis for educational methods and their application in the school
curriculum, including student characteristics, group and individual differences, cognitive
and personality development, learning theory, measurement, and evaluation. This course
satisfies the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for all education majors.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 103. LIFESPAN HUMAN GROWTH & DEVELOPMENT. This course will
cover human development across the lifespan-from conception to end of life. Key theories
and research in the domains of physical, socio-emotional and cognitive development will
be considered. This course is designed to meet the needs of students in nursing and other
pre-health majors. Psychology majors may not take Psychology 103. Students who have
earned credit for Psychology 209 or 211 are not permitted to take Psychology 103.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 105. PERSPECTIVES ON PSYCHOLOGY. This course is designed to fulfill the
foundations requirement for students who have taken introductory psychology at another
institution. The course will focus on the ways in which a Christian worldview impacts the
study of psychology. Topics to be covered will complement those topics typically covered
in the Foundations of Psychological Science course emphasizing the integration of
Christianity and psychology. This course may not be taken by a student who has completed
Psychology 101 at Grove City College. Prerequisite: any comparable Psychology 101 class
taken at another institution.
Semester course, one hour.
PSYC 200. CROSS-CULTURAL PSYCHOLOGY. A study of the critical and
comparative effects of cultural and international differences on human psychology. Topics
will include cultural presuppositions and differences, cognition, emotion, intelligence,
testing, motivation, conflict, and mental health, with a particular emphasis on human
development, social psychology, and conflict.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 201. STATISTICAL METHODS. This course will examine the mathematical
reasoning and methodology underlying decision-making in the sciences. Students will
develop skills in the analysis and interpretation of data from scientific experiments, enabling

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 301

them to be informed consumers of the professional literature. Topics will include descriptive
statistics, probability theory, and inferential statistics. Students may only receive credit for
one of Psychology 201 or Statistics 131.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 202. PSYCHOLOGY OF RELIGION. A psychological approach to the
understanding of religious life with special emphasis on the Judeo-Christian tradition. In
addition to traditional areas in the psychology of religion (e.g., religious development,
measurement of religion and spirituality, forgiveness, religious conversion, religious
orientation and attitudes, etc.) the course will consider issues surrounding the integration of
psychology and theology, the innateness of spirituality, the nature of the soul or self, the
neuroscience of religious experience, and the role of religion and spirituality in health.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 204. RESEARCH METHODS. Introduction to laboratory techniques in
psychological science. Methods of controlled investigation, use of databases for
psychology, evaluation of results using SPSS, and writing reports of experiments using APA
format will be emphasized. Three lectures and two hours of lab per week. This course meets
the Information Literacy (IL) requirement for the Psychology major. Prerequisites:
Psychology 101 or Social Work 101, and Psychology 201.
Spring semester only, four hours.
PSYC 206. INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL COUNSELING. An introduction
to the theories, practices and ethical issues employed in professional counseling.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 207. PSYCHOLOGY OF PERSONALITY. A study of the major psychological
theories of personality development and their application to applied psychology.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 208. SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY. The scientific study of the way individuals think,
feel, and behave under the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others. Our study of
social psychology will investigate the relationship between attitudes and behavior,
attribution theory, cultural influences, conformity, prejudice, aggression, attraction,
altruism, conflict, etc. We will concentrate on applying social psychology to real world
experiences and will include in-depth analysis of original literature.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 209. CHILD DEVELOPMENT: LIFESPAN PART 1. This course is a survey of
the child development field. Students will be encouraged to develop an appreciation for the
value of science for understanding children and their development. Key theories and
research regarding cognition, language, attachment, moral reasoning, and the effects of
family and peers will be considered. This course is required for all Early Childhood and
Elementary Education majors. Students who have earned credit for Psychology 103 may
not take Psychology 209.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 211. ADULT DEVELOPMENT AND AGING: LIFESPAN PART 2.
Investigation of the psychological, biological, and social aspects of early, middle, and late
adult development emphasizing both the opportunities and limitations of aging. Students
who have earned credit for Psychology 103 may not take Psychology 211.
Semester course, three hours.

302 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

PSYC 214. INDUSTRIAL/ORGANIZATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY. The psychology of
work and organizations. Introduction to the use and application of psychology in the
workplace. Prerequisites: Psychology 101 and 208.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
psychology. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor
are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PSYC 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in psychology. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PSYC 290. STUDIES IN PSYCHOLOGY. This course, which varies each semester,
involves the examination of different areas of psychology with a focus on new areas not
covered in regular coursework.
Offered periodically, semester course, one, two or three hours.
PSYC 301. HISTORY AND SYSTEMS OF PSYCHOLOGY. A study of the
philosophical and scientific antecedents and trends that have culminated in contemporary
psychological science. Beginning in the Classical world and moving through the Middle
Ages, Renaissance, and the scientific revolution of the 16th – 18th centuries, this course will
trace how psychology emerged as an independent discipline at the end of the 19th century.
Significant questions raised by psychology, changing views of the soul or self, and how
American culture in the 21st century has become a psychological society will be considered.
Primary works of influential philosophers and scientists will be read. Prerequisite: Twelve
hours of psychology.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 305. HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY. Health psychology is devoted to understanding
psychological influences on how people stay healthy, why they become ill, and how they
respond when they do get ill. This course explores the psychological and social factors that
lead to the enhancement of health, the prevention and treatment of illness, and the evaluation
and modification of health policies that influence health care. Prerequisite: Three hours of
psychology coursework, excluding Psychology 201.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 306. SENSATION AND PERCEPTION. This course covers the physiological
basis of sensation and the psychological aspects of perception. Vision, audition, the
chemical and the cutaneous senses are investigated as are the perception of time, music,
speech and pain. Prerequisite: Psychology 101.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 310. PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT. This course will include a) an analysis
of psychometric principles, including reliability, validity, and standardization; b) an analysis
of intelligence, personality, and interest testing, including in-depth investigation of various
tests; and c) an analysis of current issues including discrimination in testing. Prerequisites:
Psychology 101 and 201.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 312. ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY. This course provides an overview of the
various psychological disorders, as well as theoretical, clinical, and experimental
perspectives of the study of psychopathology. Emphasis is placed on classification, etiology,
assessment and treatment of the major disorders. Prerequisites: Psychology 101 and three
hours of psychology.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 315. FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY. This course introduces the student to
psychological research, principles and practice as applied to the legal system. Emphasis will

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 303

be placed on the interface between clinical work and the courts, as well as the psychology
of the offender. Prerequisite: Psychology 101.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 316. BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE. A study of the biological bases of
behavior. Neuroanatomy and fundamental principles of neurophysiology and neural
communication will be covered as will be the physiological mechanisms operating in
sensation, emotion, consciousness, ingestive behavior, learning and memory,
reinforcement, addiction, and psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia. Prerequisite:
Psychology 101 or permission of the instructor.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 318. COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY. A study of human mental processes such as
memory, reasoning, decision-making, judgment, and social cognition. Included will be a
cognitive neuroscience perspective on mental processing and the practical implications of
these processes in social evaluation, culture, and public policy. Prerequisites: Psychology
101, 201 and 204.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 319. COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY LABORATORY. Using computer
simulations of cognitive psychology methods, students will investigate human mental
processes such as memory, attention, recognition, decision-making, problem-solving, and
social evaluation. Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 201 and 204. Semester course, one hour.
PSYC 322. MARRIAGE & FAMILY: ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION. The
course examines assessment and intervention in marriage and family with an emphasis on
marriage. Primary sources examining empirically developed and tested approaches will be
considered. The focus will be on scientific understanding rather than the development of
counseling skills. Prerequisite: Psychology 101; and Psychology 201, Management 201 or
Mathematics 201.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 326. PREPARATION FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONS. This
course will provide an in-depth review of current applications of counseling and
psychotherapy tailored for students planning to attend graduate school in mental health
delivery or employment post-graduation. Students will review current theories and trends
of mental health service delivery in the United States. Principles of professional
development will be covered leading to a personal plan of professional development for
each student. Students will review current ethical and theoretical issues in counseling and
psychotherapy. Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 206, 207.
Semester course, three hours.
PSYC 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
psychology. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PSYC 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in psychology. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PSYC 390. STUDIES IN PSYCHOLOGY. This course, which varies each semester,
involves the examination of different areas of psychology with a focus on new areas not
covered in regular coursework.
Offered periodically, semester course, one, two or three hours.
PSYC 401. ADVANCED STATISTICS. An introduction to multivariate statistics by
using computer statistical packages as applied to social science research including such
topics as multiple regression, discriminant analysis, factor analysis, multivariate analysis of

304 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

variance (MANOVA), path analysis, and other frequently used multivariate statistical
techniques. Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 201 and 204.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
PSYC 404. ADVANCED RESEARCH METHODS. A study of advanced research
methods, including an independent research project. An IRB proposal, data collection, and
formal written and oral presentation of the study are required. This course meets the Writing
Intensive (WI) and Speaking Intensive (SI) requirements for the psychology major.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 201 and 204.
Semester course, four hours.
PSYC 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in
psychology. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are
required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PSYC 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in psychology. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.
PSYC 480. INTERNSHIP IN PSYCHOLOGY. An opportunity for upper class
psychology majors, with a minimum of fifteen hours in psychology, to participate in
individual field experiences in clinical or counseling settings under the professional
supervision of the staff of cooperating institutions. Prerequisite: Permission of the
department chair.
Semester course, one to six hours.
PSYC 499. HONORS IN PSYCHOLOGY. Open only to senior psychology majors who
have honors grades. Application must be made to the department and a proposal for the
study approved before registering. The student studies under the guidance of department
staff and must submit evidence of superior achievement.
Semester course, one, two
or three hours.

Social Work (SOCW)
SOCW 101. FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL WORK. This foundational course introduces
students to the rich and diverse discipline of social work and its widespread societal
contributions. Students will learn the fundamentals of generalist social work; the ethics,
tenets, and history of the profession; as well as an overview of the social welfare system in
America. Examination of prominent social work values, philosophical assumptions, and
theories occurs throughout the course. Discussions of the diverse populations and settings
served by social workers are also discussed. Thoughtfully integrating the core values of
social work and Biblical view of human nature is a particular aim of the course.
Semester course, three hours.
SOCW 205. ADMINISTRATION IN SOCIAL WORK. This course introduces students
to conceptualizing social problems through careful problem analysis and the development
of effective programmatic responses. Because social service agencies are widely funded
through public and private grants, students will also be introduced to the process of grant
writing. Emphasis is placed throughout the course on responding to human need through
service that demonstrates compassion, competence, and a commitment to promoting human
dignity and flourishing.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SOCW 264. HUMAN BEHAVIOR IN THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT I. This course
provides a solid understanding of human behavior and development as it is manifested and
developed within families, groups, organizations, and communities. The relationships
among biological, social, psychological, cultural, and spiritual realities are examined for the

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 305

ways they impact and inform human behavior. Discussions of human behavior and
development will be specifically targeted to forming a solid understanding and foundation
for the practice of social work. Prerequisite: Social Work 101.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SOCW 272. SOCIAL WORK PRACTICUM. This practicum will be structured around
a professional field experience of 140 on-site hours completed at a local organization
providing quality social services. This experience is a critical component of preparing for a
Social Work career. In addition to the field experience, students will attend a weekly, onehour meeting led by a professor from the department with the purpose of collectively
discussing case scenarios as well as interpersonal dynamics with relevance to the
development of competent social work practice. Practicum objectives include directly
observing how professional social work practice is implemented within a specific setting,
integrating an introductory generalist theory with practice, obtaining knowledge about
macro social service delivery systems, applying critical thinking skills to specific case
situations, and demonstrating increased self-awareness related to interest areas within the
field of social work. Prerequisites: Social Work 101, 264, and 382.
Semester course, three hours.
SOCW 280. INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT. This course, designed
both for students of social work and students of any major interested in issues of
international social justice, examines the history and development of these problems from
micro and macro perspectives, exploring the social, political, and economic dynamics that
catalyze and perpetuate unjust practices as well as the everyday experiences of those directly
impacted. A social development model will be introduced, as well as case studies and
readings from the Global South that encourage students to consider cross-cultural
perspectives on the efficacy of social development practices. Not solely a theoretical
examination, the course will encourage students to formulate and integrate ideas grounded
in knowledge about cross-cultural social work practice, human development, and theology.
Prerequisite: Social Work 101 and 264.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SOCW 302. GENERALIST PRACTICE I. This course introduces the generalist practice
model of social work including theoretical frameworks, epistemological foundations, values
and ethics, and practice approaches with individuals and families situated in a diverse range
of environments. The study of social work functions, knowledge formation, and
foundational skills are integral to the course. Additionally, the development of micro-level
observation, assessment, interviewing, and clinical analysis utilizing a problem-solving
approach is a primary emphasis. Prerequisites: Social Work 101 and 264.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SOCW 305. CHILD WELFARE. Children represent a group that is critically important to
the future, yet also a group without the ability to advocate for themselves. This course will
examine child welfare, society’s response to providing services for children who lack
adequate adult care and nurturing. The history, philosophies, programs, policies, and
practices which comprise past and current child welfare services will be examined for both
their efficacy and intended and unintended consequences upon some of the most vulnerable
persons within our society. Case studies that illustrate the complexities of providing ethical
and competent child welfare practice will also be integrated into the course. Prerequisite:
Social Work 101.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SOCW 310. GENERALIST PRACTICE II. This course builds upon the preceding
course, Generalist Practice I, by extending the study of social work theory and practice to

306 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

task and treatment groups and to social service institutions. The course focuses on
developing and evaluating the practice skills and interventions that are necessary for
facilitating effective change within each of these levels. A section on case management
theory and skills, as well as an introduction to motivational interviewing are also included.
Special attention will be given to interventions that are particularly geared toward
individuals on the margins of society including the poor, disabled, elderly, and other at-risk
populations. Prerequisite: Social Work 302.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SOCW 342. SOCIAL WELFARE POLICY ANALYSIS. This course carefully analyzes
and evaluates social welfare policies and programs as responses to defined social problems
within their historical, political, and economic contexts. Past and present social welfare
policies will be evaluated from a generalist perspective and students will be encouraged to
critically analyze policies for both their efficacy and intended and unintended consequences.
Policies related to poverty, advocacy, mental health, homelessness, racism, and child
welfare will be specifically examined for their relevance to the practice of social work.
Prerequisite: Social Work 101.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SOCW 364. HUMAN BEHAVIOR IN THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT II. This course
explores the frameworks, values, and skills inherent to meeting micro-level—individual and
family—needs through an examination of the “mediating layers of society” of our
organizations and communities. The underlying assumption of the course is there is a
reciprocal relationship between individuals and families and the larger contexts in which
they are situated. Therefore, working for change on any level requires an understanding of
the full range of social contexts that both positively and negatively affect groups of people.
This course explores the middle context which lies between that of the individual and
macro-level social welfare policies. Particular emphasis will be given to exploring ways of
intervening in society’s middle layers that utilize best practices and promote human
flourishing. Prerequisites: Social Work 264.
Spring only semester, three hours.
SOCW 382. HUMAN DIVERSITY IN SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE. This course
highlights the ways in which an understanding of human diversity informs all aspects of
social work including practice and policy. Attention to some of the ways humans are diverse
including race and socioeconomic status will be carefully examined as they relate to the
practice of social work. Case studies will also be utilized to explore ways in which
individuals and groups are negatively affected psychologically, economically, and
spiritually by biased or unjust systems and structures. Prerequisite: Social Work 101.
Spring semester only, three hours.
SOCW 410. SOCIAL WORK CAPSTONE. This course requires students to demonstrate
integration of the courses in the social work major in a final research project. The project
entails research into a specific social work practice or social welfare policy and involves
study design, implementation, analysis, and presentation. This course meets the Writing
Intensive (WI), Speaking Intensive (SI), Information Literacy (IL) requirements for the
social work major. Prerequisites: Social Work 101.
Fall semester only, three hours.
SOCW 420. FIELD PLACEMENT I. In this course, students are placed in social service
organizations under the supervision of social work practitioners who are “teachers” in the
field (field instructors) and under the careful guidance of the on-campus faculty. Students
do not simply “work” in the setting, but are guided by specific learning outcomes. The goals
of the field placement experience are to link the traditional curriculum with experiential
learning through the development of a professional self and the development of foundational

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 307

generalist practice skills with clients and client systems. Prerequisites: Senior status and
faculty approval.
Fall semester only, four hours.
SOCW 421. FIELD PLACEMENT II. In this course, students are placed in social service
organizations under the supervision of social work practitioners who are “teachers” in the
field (field instructors) and under the careful guidance of the on-campus faculty. Students
do not simply “work” in the setting, but are guided by specific learning outcomes. The goals
of the field placement experience are to link the traditional curriculum with experiential
learning through the development of a professional self and the development of foundational
generalist practice skills with clients and client systems. Prerequisites: Social Work 420.
Spring semester only, four hours.
SOCW 425. FIELD PLACEMENT SEMINAR I. The purpose of the seminar is to
collectively discuss case scenarios, as well as interpersonal dynamics with relevance to the
development of competent social work practice. Some of the course seminars will also be
topical in nature, covering experiential components of social work practice such as
confidentiality, boundaries, ethics, integration of faith and practice, and professional selfcare. Prerequisites: Senior standing and faculty approval.
Fall semester only, one hour.
SOCW 426. FIELD PLACEMENT SEMINAR II. The purpose of the seminar is to
collectively discuss case scenarios, as well as interpersonal dynamics with relevance to the
development of competent social work practice. Some of the course seminars will also be
topical in nature, covering experiential components of social work practice such as
confidentiality, boundaries, ethics, integration of faith and practice, and professional selfcare. Prerequisites: Senior standing and faculty approval. Spring semester only, one hour.
SOCW 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Opportunity for students to do independent study
work in a specialized area of social work. Senior standing, permission of the department
chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
Semester course, one, two or three hours.

Sociology (SOCI)
SOCI 101. FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIOLOGY. An introductory study of the major and
enduring theoretical ideas, concepts, methods, and debates that have shaped and informed
the discipline of sociology from its inception to the current day. Topics include the origins
of the discipline, the social conditions under which humans may thrive, social order,
religion, and inequality. Attention is also paid to the ways in which the Christian tradition
perceives and, in some cases, may challenge contemporary social conditions.
Recommended to precede all other sociology courses.
Three hours.
SOCI 103. FOUNDATIONS OF CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY. An introduction to
the study of culture, its meaning and significance for human beings, and the ways in which
man organizes his activities to meet universal human needs, especially in simpler societies.
Three hours.
SOCI 105. PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIOLOGY. A one-credit course for students
wishing to meet the College’s “Foundations of Social Sciences” general education
requirement by transferring in a standard introduction to sociology course taken elsewhere,
that provides the unique content within Grove City College’s Sociology 101 Foundations
of Sociology course. The following themes are covered: epistemological foundations of
sociology, sociological views of human beings and their actions, foundations of social order,
engines of social progress, and sociological understandings of the divine. Prerequisite: A
Sociology 101 comparable class transferred from another institution.
Three hours.

308 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

SOCI 201. SOCIAL PROBLEMS. An analysis of American social problems such as
family, sexuality, drugs, crime, health, poverty, race, and global problems such as
population, the environment, religion, war and terrorism.
Three hours.
SOCI 203. SOCIOLOGY OF DEVIANT BEHAVIOR. A study of the social aspects of
personal deviation including consideration of the alcoholic, the drug addict, the suicidal and
the sexually maladjusted from the perspective of social background, causative factors, and
possible therapy. Prerequisite: Sociology 101 or 201.
Three hours.
SOCI 208. GERONTOLOGY. A general introduction to gerontology, with emphasis on
the normative aspects of aging and adaptation to old age. Topics include the role of senior
citizens in the family and a youth-oriented culture, theories of disengagement, role activity
in retirement and aging from a cross-cultural perspective.
Three hours.
SOCI 221. WHITE COLLAR CRIME. An in-depth examination of important concepts,
theories, and facts related to white collar crime, using case studies, academic lectures, guest
lecturers and films. The degree to which such crimes occur, as well as their economic and
social costs, will be considered. Victims and offenders will be described. Legal issues and
problems in dealing with white collar crime will also be considered, with a special
consideration of the typical legal, political, and cultural barriers encountered in trying to
create and enforce relevant laws, including detection and punishments.
Three hours.
SOCI 233. INTRODUCTION TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE. An overview of every
element of the criminal justice system, looking at the process of handling offenders from
crime detection through arrest, adjudication, prosecution/defense, sentencing, incarceration,
probation, and parole. Issues of criminal law (ethics, philosophy, and basic structure and
rules) and policy, defendants, victims, and the roles of different criminal justice agents will
also be considered. Biblical perspectives will be examined throughout, as will, where
appropriate, private alternatives to response to crime.
Three hours.
SOCI 241. MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY. A study of the social and cultural aspects of
medicine and health, strongly emphasizing the results of cross-cultural and comparative
research. Topics include health professionals and services around the world, alternative
healers, the demography of health and illness, and privatized versus government-sponsored
health care systems.
Three hours.
SOCI 251. COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE. A general introduction to marriage and the
family that emphasizes practical living. Topics include dating, courtship, engagement,
marriage, romantic love, and marital adjustment across the lifespan. Also included are
discussions of singleness, parenting, and divorce.
Three hours.
SOCI 260. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Individual study of specialized topics in sociology.
Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.
SOCI 270. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in sociology. Sophomore standing, permission of the department chair, and a
faculty sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.
SOCI 290. STUDIES IN SOCIOLOGY. This course, which varies each semester,
involves the examination of different areas of sociology with a focus on new areas not
covered in regular coursework.
Three hours.

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION / 309

SOCI 308. SOCIOLOGY OF RELIGION. This course will examine religion from a
sociological perspective, including such topics as sociological theories about religion, how
religion affects individuals and societies, secularization and worldwide religious
resurgence, effects of globalization upon religion, America’s contemporary religious
climate, contemporary American Evangelicalism, and the future of religion. Three hours.
SOCI 312. THE FAMILY AS A SOCIAL INSTITUTION. A course that focuses upon
the status, development, and future of the modern American family from historical, crosscultural, and sociological perspectives. Examines contemporary debates over legal
definitions of “family”, patterns of family structure, families and the elderly, family policy,
and reviews non-governmental approaches to strengthening the family. Recommended for
those students contemplating careers in teaching, the helping professions, ministry, public
policy, and research.
Three hours.
SOCI 314. CRIMINOLOGY. An introduction to the scientific study of crime. This
includes classical and modern criminological theories and methods, various types of
criminal behavior and what triggers them, social and environmental factors that affect levels
of crime, comparisons of crime rates across place and time. Prerequisite: Sociology 101 or
201.
Alternate years, fall semester only, three hours.
SOCI 315. JUVENILE DELINQUENCY. An examination of the meaning of juvenile
delinquency and the social institutions and psychological phenomena that shape juveniles.
Significant trends in delinquency will be highlighted.
Three hours.
SOCI 321. SOCIAL CHANGE. An analysis of patterns, mechanisms and strategies of past
and future social change in a rapidly changing world. Social and political movement theory,
revolutions, the force of religion in social movement activism, and recent changes in
American society are considered. Prerequisite: Sociology 101.
Three hours.
SOCI 331. LAW AND SOCIETY. An exploration of the relationship among law, legal
systems, and social structure. Topics include the origin and development of law,
sociological theories of law, the relationship of Christianity and the law in the West, analysis
and cross-cultural comparisons of dispute resolutions and other judicial processes (includes
legal anthropology), comparisons of modern legal systems, the social psychology of legal
decision-making including jury studies, and the legal profession.
Three hours.
SOCI 356. POVERTY AND STRATIFICATION. An overview of the nature and extent
of poverty and stratification in the United States and the world, including consideration of
empirical data, sociological theory, and Christian perspectives. Special attention will be
given to private, faith-based solutions to chronic poverty. Prerequisite: Sociology 101 or
201.
Three hours.
SOCI 360. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Available to students with a minimum of twelve
hours in sociology. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.
SOCI 370. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in sociology. Junior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.
SOCI 375. GLOBAL SOCIETY. An investigation of how the dynamics of social order
are impacted by the development of a global social order, including Christian perspectives
on global order.
Three hours.

310 / COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

SOCI 377. SOCIAL RESEARCH METHODS. This course will study the basic methods
for social research. This includes selecting topics, developing and operationalizing
concepts, sampling, establishing causal relations, data collection using secondary
(especially aggregate and comparative) sources, content analysis and other unobtrusive
approaches, surveys, field research, interviews, experiments. The weekly lab will focus on
creating databases for a computer statistical package; coding, entering and analyzing data,
and writing professional research reports. This class will fulfill the Information Literacy
(IL) and Writing Intensive (WI) requirements for the Sociology major. Prerequisites:
Sociology 101 and Psychology 201. Alternate years (odd), fall semester only, four hours.
SOCI 390. STUDIES IN SOCIOLOGY. This course, which varies each semester,
involves the examination of different areas of sociology with a focus on new areas not
covered in regular coursework.
Three hours.
SOCI 452. SOCIOLOGY COLLOQUIUM. Guided intensive study of a specific
sociological problem or topic under the guidance of one Sociology faculty member, and
training in the art of professional speaking in the field. Students will orally present and
defend their study proposals and completed final projects before the Sociology faculty and
other students in the class. This course fulfills the discipline-specific Speaking Intensive
(SI) requirement for Sociology majors. Prerequisite: junior status.
One hour.
SOCI 473. SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY. Overview of major schools of Sociological
Theory with a focus on major thinkers and the central questions that have historically
animated the discipline. These include: Functionalism, Conflict and Critical Theories
including Marxism and World Systems Theory, Exchange and Rational Choice, PostModern, Symbolic Interactionism, Phenomenology and Ethnomethodology. Prerequisites:
Sociology 101 and junior standing in the Sociology major, or Instructor’s permission.
Alternate years (even), spring semester only, three hours
SOCI 460. INDEPENDENT STUDY. Available to students with a minimum of twelve
hours in sociology. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.
SOCI 470. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH. An opportunity to conduct supervised
research in sociology. Senior standing, permission of the department chair, and a faculty
sponsor are required.
One, two or three hours.
SOCI 480. INTERNSHIP IN SOCIOLOGY. This course offers practical experience
appropriate for the sociology field. Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair.
Semester course, one to six hours.
SOCI 499. HONORS IN SOCIOLOGY. Open only to seniors who have honors grades
and who have completed a minimum of fifteen hours in the department. Application must
be made to the department and a proposal for the study must be approved before registering.
The student studies under the guidance of department staff. Prerequisite: Fifteen hours in
sociology including Sociology 377.
One, two or three hours.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 311

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)
Board of Trustees
Grove City College, as an independent institution, is governed in all its affairs by a
Board of Trustees composed of private citizens.
Term Expires June 2023
2020* Fryan, Laura F,. Esq.’11 .................................................................. Massillon, OH
2012
Holt, Deborah ’84 (Treasurer) ............................................................ Wexford, PA
2018
Jones, Craig W. ’74 (Vice Chair)........................................................Norman, OK
2014
McClelland, Anne M. ’81 ................................................................. West End, NC
2004
Miller, Ronald H. ’75........................................................................ Sewickley, PA
2008
Owens, Dawn ’90 ....................................................................... Minneapolis, MN
2020
Sems, Richard ’93 ........................................................................Chesterfield, MO
1995
Shlapak, Milton W. ’59........................................................................ Atlanta, GA
2014
Skinner, Kiron K., Ph.D.................................................................. Pittsburgh, PA
2018
Templin, Donald C. ’84 ...................................................................... Findlay, OH
2020
Weaver, Rev. D. Dean, D.Min. ’86 ................................................ Pittsburgh, PA
Term Expires June 2024
2006
Batchelder, Alice, Hon........................................................................ Medina, OH
2006
Cashdollar, David ’71 ..................................................................... Grove City, PA
2009
Gummel, Joseph ’75 ...................................................................... Springfield, OH
2020
Hopeman, Elizabeth ......................................................................... Wellesley, MA
2010
Jones, Robb M., Esq. ’75 .................................................................... Ashburn, VA
2006
Mathie, Jody, M.D. ’77 ........................................................................ Denver, CO
2015
Meakem, Glen T. ............................................................................. Sewickley, PA
2012
Muetzel, Douglas ’80............................................................................... Mars, PA
2006
Porter, David, Hon. ’88 (Secretary) ....................................... Bradford Woods, PA
2004
Stewart, William C. ’61 ......................................................................... Butler, PA
2021* Volante Walshak, Jana, Esq. ’07 .................................................... Pittsburgh, PA
Term Expires June 2025
2001
Breen, Edward D. ’78 (Chair) .......................................................... New Hope, PA
2018
Bulette, Elizabeth, Ed.D. .............................................................. White Stone, VA
2010
Chafuen, Alejandro A., Ph.D. ’84 ....................................................... McLean, VA
2022* Mascio, Wendy ‘88. ........................................................ Cranberry Township, PA
2000
Mehaffey, William J. ’64 ................................................................ Pittsburgh, PA
2012
Peters, Raleigh ’95 ........................................................................ Hilton Head, SC
2018
Schwab, John A., Esq. ’98 ................................................................. Gibsonia, PA
2013
Sveda, Allyson Baird ’88 ................................................................... Gibsonia, PA
2016
Wicker, Douglas K. ’88 .................................................................... Sewickley, PA
*Alumni Trustee

312 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

TRUSTEE EMERITUS
Baird, Louise Slavcoff ’56
Gasiewicz, Philip W.
Gunn, Rev. George R. Jr.
Hayes, Don A. ’59
Hopeman, Henry W.
Johnson, Stanley M. ’60
Landin, Thomas M. Esq. ’59
Morledge, Rev. Richard A. ’54
Nutt, Robert L. Esq. ’67
Rathburn, David R. ’79 (Chair Emeritus)
Reis, C. Dale ’67
Schwab, Arthur J., Hon. ’68 (Secretary Emeritus)
Zuschlag, Charlotte, A. ‘73
COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD
Academic Program
Buildings and Grounds
Development
Enrollment and Student Affairs
Executive
Finance and Audit
Governance
Investment
Legal Affairs
Library and Technology
Retirement

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 313

Officers of the College
NOTE: Date indicates year of initial employment

McNulty ’80, Paul J. (2014) ................................................................................... President
B.A., Grove City College; J.D., Capital University Law School.
Buckman ’82, Michael R. (2017) ......................... Vice President for Business and Finance
B.S., Grove City College; M.B.A., University of Pittsburgh.
DiStasi ’88, Vincent F. (1998) .............................. Vice President-Chief Information Officer
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D., Indiana University.
Frank ’95, Peter M. (2020) ............... ……Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs
B.A., Grove City College; M.S., University of North Carolina at Charlotte; Ph.D.,
George Mason University.
Grimm, Susan (2013)............................................................. Vice President for Operations
B.S., M.B.A., University of Pittsburgh.
Hardesty, Larry E. (2008) ............................... Vice President for Student Life and Learning
B.A., M.S., Geneva College.
Inman, John G. (1994) .....................Vice President for Institutional Support and Initiatives
B.A., Geneva College; M.B.A., D.Sc., Robert Morris University.
Prokovich ’89, Jeffrey D. (2001) ....................Vice President for Institutional Advancement
B.A., Grove City College; M.S., Geneva College.
Wishing ’83, Lee S. (1994) ...................................... Vice President for Student Recruitment
B.A., Grove City College; M.S., Geneva College.

Administration
Boleratz, Johnathan (2021) ............................................................ Director of Financial Aid
B.S., Edinboro University
MacLeod ’96, Melissa A. (2004) ............. Senior Director of Alumni and College Relations
B.S., Grove City College.
McDanel (Houk), Suzanne N. (2005) .... ……Director of College Counseling and Assistant
Professor of Psychology
B.S., M.A., Geneva College; Ph.D., Duquesne University.
Muller, Jacquelyn P. (2014) .......................................... Senior Director of Communications
B.S., M.A., Slippery Rock University.
Munnell ’92, Barbra M. (1994)................................................. Director of Library Services
B.A., Grove City College; M.S.L.S., Clarion University.

314 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Opitz, Donald D. (2020) .................. Chaplain and Senior Director of Christian Formation
B.A., Westminster College: M. Div., Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary; Ph.D.,
Boston University.
Powell ’03, Brian M. (2014) ............................................... Senior Director of Development
B.A., Grove City College; M.A., Geneva College.
Tallerico, Betty L. (1991) .............................................................. Assistant to the President
B.A., Washington and Jefferson College; M.Div., Princeton Theological Seminary;
University of Tuebingen, Germany.
Wagner, Marci K. (2008) ....................................................... Director of Human Resources
B.S., M.S., Geneva College.
Williams ’01, Michelle M. (2002) ......................................... Director of Financial Services
B.S., Grove City College.

Faculty Administration
Crute, Christy L. (2018)………………….... ......... Associate Dean of Graduate and Online
Programs, and Professor of Business Analytics
B.A., University of Akron; Ph.D., Kent State University.
English ’97, Yvonne J. (2011) ...................................... Executive Director of the Center for
Entrepreneurship and Innovation
B.A., Grove City College; M.P.S., University of Maryland.
Gibson ’02, Todd D. (2004)........................................................................ Athletic Director
B.A., Grove City College; B.A., Youngstown State University; M.S., California
University of Pennsylvania.
Hosack, Lisa L., (2013) ..................................... Assistant Dean for the Alva J. Calderwood
School of Arts and Letters, Assistant Director of the Social Work Program, and
Associate Professor
B.A., Moody Bible Institute; M.S.W., University of Illinois-Chicago; Ph.D., Michigan
State University.
Kemeny, Paul C. (2000) ................................................... Dean for the Alva J. Calderwood
School of Arts and Letters
B.A., Wake Forest University; M.A.R., M.Div., Westminster Theological Seminary;
Th.M., Duke University; Ph.D., Princeton Theological Seminary.
Kengor, Paul G. (1997) ................................ Senior Director and Chief Academic Fellow of
The Institute for Faith & Freedom at Grove City College
B.A., University of Pittsburgh; M.A., The American University; Ph.D., University of
Pittsburgh.
McFeaters ’88, ’02, Michelle (1995) ................................... Dean of The School of Business
B.A., M.S., Grove City College; D.B.A., Anderson University.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 315

Pazehoski ’01, Kristina O. (2011). …………Assistant Dean for the Albert A. Hopeman, Jr.
School of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D. Duquesne University.
Savage, Richard N. (2019) .......................................... Dean for the Albert A. Hopeman, Jr.
School of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
B.S., Juniata College; Ph.D., Indiana University.
Welton, Gary L. (1991)..................................... Assistant Dean for Institutional Assessment
B.A., Cedarville College; M.A., Slippery Rock University; M.A., Ph.D., State
University of New York at Buffalo.

Full-Time Faculty
Anderson, Erik J. (2006) ............................................ Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S., Gordon College; M.S., St. Francis Xavier University; Ph.D. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Ansberry, Christopher B. (2021) .......Associate Professor of Biblical and Religious Studies
B.A., The Master’s College; M.A., Ph.D., Wheaton College.
Antoszewski, Lisa M. (2014) .................................. Chair of the Department of Biology and
Associate Professor of Biology
B.S., Susquehanna University; Ph.D., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Augspurger, Joseph D. (1996) ............................ Chair of the Department of Chemistry and
Professor of Chemistry
B.S., Ph.D., University of Illinois Urbana, Cornell University.
Ault, Dana L. (2015) ............................................... Associate Professor of Exercise Science
B.S., Slippery Rock University; M.S., The University of Akron; Ph.D., Kent State
University.
Ayers, David J. (1996) ....................................................................... Professor of Sociology
B.A., Edinboro University; M.A., American University; Ph.D., New York University;
Montgomery College.
Baker, Elizabeth A. (2019) .................................................... Assistant Professor of History
B.A., Gordon College; M.A., Ph.D., University of Notre Dame.
Bancroft, Eric D. (2011) ............................................................... Professor of Mathematics
A.A., Seminole State College of Florida; B.S., University of Central Florida; M.S.,
Ph.D., North Carolina State University.
Bandy, Gregory A. (2018) ........................... Associate Professor of Communication Studies
B.A., Asbury College; M.A., M.F.A., University of Georgia.
Bardy, Erik R. (2006) ................................................ Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D., University of Buffalo.
Barrios, Shannon N. (2021) ........................................ Instructor of Communication Studies
B.A., Bucknell University; M.P.A., Columbia University.

316 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Bibza, James (1977)................. Professor of Biblical and Religious Studies and Philosophy
B.A., C.W. Post College; M.Div., Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary; Ph.D.,
Princeton Theological Seminary.
Biddle ’87, Wayne A. (1987)........................................................ Professor of Management
B.A., Grove City College; M.B.A., Clarion University of Pennsylvania, D.B.A.,
Anderson University.
Bilbro, Jeffrey L. (2021) ....................................................... Associate Professor of English
B.A., Ph.D., Baylor University.
Blackburn ’94, Gina M. (2009)......................................................... Professor of Education
B.A., Grove City College; M.S. Butler University; Ph.D., Indiana University.
Bonomo, Kelleen H. (2007) .......................................................... Professor of Mathematics
B.S., Westminster College; M.S., Ph.D., University of Notre Dame.
Bright, Martin E. (2008) ...................................... Professor of Psychology and Social Work
A.A., B.A., Thiel College; M.A., Edinboro University of Pennsylvania;
Ed.D., Argosy University of Sarasota.
Bright, Myron “Mike” W. (1998) .......... Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering
B.S., Purdue University; M.S., George Washington University; Ph.D., Pennsylvania
State University.
Brooks ’04, James D. (2019) ..............Chair of the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering and Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S., Grove City College; M.S., Georgia Institute of Technology; Ph.D., Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute.
Brower, Shane C. (1999) ...................................................................... Professor of Physics
B.S., Bucknell University; M.S., Ph.D., UMBC.
Butler, David M. (2019) ......................... Associate Professor in Management & Marketing
B.S., M.S., University of Pittsburgh.
Buxton, Jeffrey D. (2012) ........................................Assistant Professor of Exercise Science
B.S., Pennsylvania State University; M.S., California University of Pennsylvania;
D.Sc., Rocky Mountain University of Health Professions.
Byun, Seulgi L. (2016) ...........................Chair of the Department of Biblical and Religious
Studies and Philosophy and Professor of Biblical and Religious Studies
B.A., Gordon College; M.A., M. Div., Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary; Ph.D.,
University of Cambridge.
Campbell, G. Van (2000)........ Assistant Chair of the Department of Biblical and Religious
Studies and Philosophy, and Professor of Sociology and Biblical and Religious Studies
B.S., Bryan College; Th.M., Dallas Theological Seminary; Ph.D., University of
Pittsburgh.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 317

Carruth, Melissa D. (2020) .................................................... Assistant Professor of Spanish
M.A., A.B.D., University of Georgia.
Carson, Kenneth P. (2015) ....................................................... …Professor of Management
B.S., B.A., Geneva College; M.A., Ph.D., University of Akron.
Carter, Beverly H. (1992) ........................................................................ Professor of Music
B.M., Furman University; M.A., Eastman School of Music; Ph.D., Ohio
University; Fulbright Scholar, University of Vienna.
Chapman ’04, Jarrett M. (2012)………… Associate Chair of the Department of Education
and Professor of Education
B.S., Grove City College; M.S., Slippery Rock University; D.Ed., Indiana University
of Pennsylvania.
Christman, Alan M. (1988) ........................................... Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S.M.P.E., M.S. Mng. E., Pennsylvania State University; B.S.E.E., M.S.E.E., West
Virginia University; Ph.D., Ohio University.
Clauss ’83, Michelle A. (1991) ............................... Chair of the Department of Mechanical
Engineering and Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D., Carnegie Mellon University.
Clem, James L. (2013) .......................................................... Associate Professor of Physics
B.Sc., University of Arkansas; M.Sc., Ph.D., University of Victoria.
Conway III, Lucian (2022) ............................................................. Professor of Psychology
Ph.D., University of British Columbia.
Coulter ’91, Michael L. (1995) ................ Chair of the Department of Political Science and
Professor of Political Science and Humanities
B.A., Grove City College; M.A., Ph.D., University of Dallas.
Craig ’77, Betsy J. (1981) ................................................. Professor of English and Theatre
A.B., Grove City College; Leeds University, Bretton Hall Drama, England; M.A., New
York University.
Cramer, Susan J. (2002).................................................................... Professor of Chemistry
B.A., Malone University; M.S., University of Toledo; Ph.D., University of Akron.
Crute, Christy L. (2018)................. Associate Dean of Graduate and Online Programs, and
Professor of Business Analytics
B.A., University of Akron; Ph.D., Kent State University.
Culbertson ’84, Linda D. (2000) ....................................................... Professor of Education
B.A., Grove City College; M.Ed. Certification, Edinboro University of
Pennsylvania; Ed.D., Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
Dellinger ’07, Brian J. (2013) ...............................Associate Professor of Computer Science
B.S., Grove City College; M.S., Ph.D., North Carolina State University.

318 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Dickinson, Brian C. (2020) ................................... Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.S., Houghton College; M.S., Ph.D., University of Rochester.
DiStasi ’88, Vincent F. (1998) ……….Vice President-Chief Information Officer, Associate
Professor of Chemistry and Guest Lecturer in Business
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D., Indiana University.
Dixon ’05, John M. (2017) .................. ………………Assistant Chair of the Department of
Mechanical Engineering and Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S.M.E., Grove City College; M.S., Ph.D., University of Minnesota.
Drai, Rémi (2020) ......................................................... Associate Professor of Mathematics
M.S., Ph.D., University of Nice, France.
Dreves ’97, Susan M. (2004) ............................................. Assistant Professor of Education
. B.A., Grove City College; M.A., Westminster College; Ed.D., Point Park University.
Dudt, Jan F. (2004) ............................................................................... Professor of Biology
B.A., Covenant College; M.Ed., University of Pittsburgh; M.S., Ph.D., Emory
University.
Edwards, Jason R. (2003) ...................................................................... Professor of History
B.A., Asbury College; M.A., Ph.D., University of Kentucky.
English ’97, Yvonne J. (2011)…………………… ...... Executive Director of the Center for
Entrepreneurship and Innovation, Entrepreneur in Residence, and Professor of Practice
B.A., Grove City College; M.P.S., University of Maryland.
Erb, Andrew S. (2018) ............................................................................. Professor of Music
B.A., Westminster College; M.M., Youngstown State University.
Fair ’85, Mark C. (2004)........................ Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Physics
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D., Carnegie Mellon University.
Falcetta, Michael F. (2003) ............................................................... Professor of Chemistry
B.S., State University of New York College at Oswego; Ph.D., University of
Pittsburgh.
Farone, Tracy S. (2010) ........................................................................ Professor of Biology
B.S., St. Vincent College; D.V.M., Ohio State University Veterinary College.
Fecich, Samantha J. (2014) ............................................... Associate Professor of Education
B.S., California University of Pennsylvania; M.Ed., Ph.D., Penn State University.
Flanders ’04, Steven T. (2016) ..................................... Associate Professor of Mathematics
B.S., Grove City College; M.Ed., Gannon University; Ed.D., University of Pittsburgh.
Frank ’95, Peter M. (2020)………………………Provost and Vice President for Academic
Affairs, and Professor of Economics
B.A., Grove City College; M.S., University of North Carolina at Charlotte; Ph.D.,
George Mason University.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 319

Franklin, Christopher E. (2014) ....................................................... Professor of Philosophy
B.A., Biola University; M.A., University of California, Riverside; Ph.D., University of
California, Riverside.
Fuller ’13, Caleb S. (2017) .............................................. Associate Professor of Economics
B.A., Grove City College; M.A., Ph.D., George Mason University.
Gerhart, Hayden D. (2020) ..................................... Associate Professor of Exercise Science
B.S., M.S., Indiana University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D., Kent State University.
Gibson ’02, Todd D. (2004)................................................................. Athletic Director and
Assistant Professor of Exercise Science
B.A., Grove City College; B.A., Youngstown State University; M.S., California
University of Pennsylvania.
Graham, Mark W. (2003) .. …Chair of the Department of History and Professor of History
B.A., Bob Jones University; M.A., University of South Carolina; Ph.D.,
Michigan State University.
Graybill ’96, Keith (2022) ............................................... Assistant Professor of Accounting
B. S., Grove City College; MBA., Johns Hopkins University.
Grimm, Richard C. (1997) .................................................................... Professor of Finance
B.S.B.A., M.B.A., Youngstown State University; Ph.D., Kent State University.
Harp, Gillis J. (1999) ............................................................................. Professor of History
B.A., Carleton University; M.A., Ph.D., University of Virginia.
Harvey, Andrew J. (2007)..................................................................... Professor of English
B.A., James Madison University; M.A., Ph.D., University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill.
Hasper, Joseph J. (2017) .......................................................... Associate Professor of Music
B.F.A., Carnegie Mellon University; M.Ed., American Intercontinental University;
M.M., D.M.A., University of Oklahoma.
Havrilla ’87, Laura R. (2012) ........................................................... Professor of Marketing
B.A., Grove City College; M.B.A., Duke University.
Heisey, Natalie D. (2020) ................................................. Associate Professor of Education
B.S., Edinboro University; M.Ed., Gannon University; Ed.D. University of Pittsburgh.
Herbener, Jeffrey M. (1997) ...... Chair of the Department of Economics and Sociology and
Professor of Economics
B.S., Nebraska Wesleyan University; M.S., Ph.D., Oklahoma State University.
Hollenberger, Jennifer C. (2018) .................................... Assistant Professor of Social Work
A.A., Liberty University; B.A., M.S.W., University of Pittsburgh.
Homan, Kristin N. (1992) ............................................................... Professor of Psychology
B.S., University of Wisconsin; Ph.D., University of Minnesota.

320 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Homan, Timothy C. (1991)............................................................... Professor of Chemistry
B.S., Gardner-Webb College; Ph.D., University of Colorado, University of Minnesota.
Horton, Joseph J. (2002) ....... Chair of the Department of Psychology and Social Work and
Professor of Psychology
B.S., Kutztown University; M.S., Ph.D., Pennsylvania State University.
Hosack, Lisa L. (2013) ....................Assistant Dean for the Alva J. Calderwood School of Arts
and Letters, Director of the Social Work Program and Associate Professor
of Social Work
B.A., Moody Bible Institute; M.S.W., University of Illinois-Chicago; Ph.D., Michigan
State University.
Huebert, Melva H. (1998) ........................................................................ Professor of Music
B.M., M.M., Youngstown State University; M.A., Ph.D., Kent State University.
Hutchins, Jonathan O. (2018) ............................... Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.S., Virginia Tech; Ph.D., University of California, Irvine.
Inman, John G. (1994) .......................... Vice President Institutional Support and Initiatives
B.A., Geneva College; M.B.A., D.Sc., Robert Morris University.
Jackson, Michael A. (2007) ............................Chair of the Department of Mathematics and
Professor of Mathematics
B.S., Pennsylvania State University; M.S., Ph.D., Purdue University.
Jenkins, Stephen P. (1992) .................................................................... Professor of Biology
B.A., Covenant College; M.S., Ph.D., The University of Georgia.
Kemeny, Paul C. (2000) ............................ Dean for the Alva J. Calderwood School of Arts
and Letters, and Professor of Biblical and Religious Studies and Humanities
B.A., Wake Forest University; M.A.R., M.Div., Westminster Theological Seminary;
Th.M., Duke University; Ph.D., Princeton Theological Seminary.
Kengor, Paul G. (1997)…………... ............. Executive Director of The Institute for Faith &
Freedom at Grove City College and Professor of Political Science
B.A., University of Pittsburgh; M.A., The American University; Ph.D.,
University of Pittsburgh.
Killam, Jason (2021) ............................................................. Associate Professor of Spanish
B.A., North Park University; M.A., University of Texas at Arlington; M.A., Ph.D.,
Indiana University.
Knupp, April M. (2021) ......................................................... Assistant Professor of Spanish
M.S., St. Louis University Madrid; Ph.D., Arizona State University.
Kocur ’87, Richard D. (2009) ....... Chair of the Department of Management and Marketing
and Associate Professor of Marketing
B.S., Grove City College; M.B.A., University of Pittsburgh; D.B.A, Anderson
University.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 321

Kriley ’88, Charles E. (1996)............................................................ Professor of Chemistry
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D., Purdue University.
Li, Qiuyan (2021) ....................................... Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S., North China University of Water Resources and Electric Power; M.S., Ph.D.,
University of Pittsburgh.
Loretto ’05, Adam J. (2015) ................................................. Associate Professor of English
B.A., Grove City College; M.A.T., Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh.
Madsen, Kelsey B. (2018)………………… ................. Chair of the Department of Modern
Languages and Assistant Professor of French
B.A., M.A., Ph.D., University of Oklahoma.
Markley ’82, Andrew W. (1991) ................................... Professor of International Business
B.A., Grove City College; J.D., Case Western Reserve University; M. Public and
International Affairs, University of Pittsburgh. Admitted, State Bar in Pennsylvania
and U. S. Supreme Court.
Marsch, Glenn A. (2004) ...................................................................... Professor of Physics
B.S., Clemson University; Ph.D., Florida State University.
Mayo ‘10, Joshua A. (2015) ................................... Chair of the Department of English and
Associate Professor of English
B.A., Grove City College; M.A., University of Mississippi; M.A., Ph.D., University of
Dallas.
McDanel (Houk), Suzanne N. (2005) ............ Director of College Counseling and Assistant
Professor of Psychology
B.S., M.A., Geneva College; Ph.D., Duquesne University.
McFeaters ’88, ’02, Michelle R. (1995)... Dean of the School of Business, and Professor of
Accounting
B.A., M.S., Grove City College; D.B.A., Anderson University.
McIntyre, Dale L. (1985) .............................................................. Professor of Mathematics
B.A., Houghton College; M.S., Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University; Ph.D., Clemson University; University of Pittsburgh.
Miller, Kimberly M. (2004) .............................. Chair of the Department of Communication
and Visual Arts and Professor of Communication Studies
B.S., M.A., Slippery Rock University; Ph.D., Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
Mitchell, Andrew J. (2008) ....................................................Associate Professor of History
B.A., Hillsdale College; M.A., Ph.D., Ohio State University.
Moeller ’93, Julie C. (2005)............................... Professor of Biblical and Religious Studies
B.A., Grove City College; M.A., Reformed Theological Seminary; Ph.D., University
of Gloucestershire.

322 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Mohr, Timothy A. (1993) ............................................. Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D., Montana State University.
Mucha, Nathanael E. (2012) ....................................Director of Design and Visual Arts and
Associate Professor of Design
B.A., Grove City College; M.F.A., Kent State University.
Mueller, Katherine E. (2014) ............................................ Associate Professor of Music and
Director of Choral Activities
B.M., Susquehanna University; M.M., New England Conservatory of Music; M.M.,
Carnegie Mellon University; D.M.A., Shenandoah University.
Munson, Jolene K. (2017).................... Director of the Grove City College Early Education
Center and Assistant Professor of Education
B.S., M.A., Edinboro University.
Munson, Paul A. (2004)........................................................................... Professor of Music
B.Mus., Wheaton College; M.A., Ph.D., University of Michigan.
Nichols ’93, Constance N. (2001)...... Chair of the Department of Education and Professor
of Education
B.A., Grove City College; M.S., Duquesne University; Ed.D., University of Pittsburgh.
Paparone ’93, Stacy A. (2008) ................... Assistant Chair of the Department of Music and
Professor of Music
B.Mus., Grove City College; M.Ed., Indiana Wesleyan University; D.M.A, Boston
University.
Pazehoski ’01, Kristina O. (2011)................. Assistant Dean for the Albert A. Hopeman, Jr.
School of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics, and Professor of Biology
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D. Duquesne University.
Potter, Eric A. (2000)............................................................................ Professor of English
B.A., Wheaton College; M.A., Ph.D., University of Virginia.
Powell, Scott K. (1991)..................................................................... Professor of Marketing
B.A., Anderson University; M.B.A., University of Pittsburgh; D.B.A., Anderson
University.
Prins, Philip J. (2014) ..................................... Chair of the Department of Exercise Science
and Associate Professor of Exercise Science
B.S., M.S., Georgia Southern University; Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh.
Rawl, Michael S. (2021) ........................................................ Assistant Professor of English
B.A., Midwestern State University; M.A., Ph.D., Baylor University.
Richards, George “Geo” A. (2019) ............ Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S., Clarkson College; M.S., Clarkson University; Ph.D., Purdue University.
Ritenour, Shawn R. (2001) .............................................................. Professor of Economics
B.A., Northwestern College; Ph.D., Auburn University.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 323

Roach, Janey A. (2020)..... Director of Nursing for the Charles Jr. & Betty Johnson School
of Nursing and Professor of Nursing
B.S., Kent State University; M.S., DNP, University of Pittsburgh.
Robbins, David ”Duffy” W. (2018) ..................................... Professor of Christian Ministries
B.A., University of North Carolina; M. Div., Gordon-Conwell Theological
Seminary; D. Min., Fuller Theological Seminary

Ruane, Aileen (2022) .............................................................. Assistant Professor of French
B.A., Kent State University; M.A., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Ph. D.,
Universite` Laval.
Rumbaugh ’07, Luke K. (2019) ................. Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
B.S., Grove City College; M.S., Ph.D., Clarkson University.
Sabousky, Richard A. (2021) ............................................................ Professor of Education
B.S., M.S., Clarion University; Ph.D., Kent State University.
Savage, Richard N. (2019) .......................... Dean for the Albert A. Hopeman, Jr. School of
Science, Engineering, and Mathematics, and Professor of Engineering
B.S., Juniata College; Ph.D., Indiana University.
Shepherd, Anne “Annie” M. (2022) ...................................... Assistant Professor of English
M.FA., Texas State University; Ph.D., University of Houston
Shaw ’95, Kevin L. (2000) ............................................................... Professor of Chemistry
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D., Texas A&M University.
Shepson III, Donald R. (2018) ...........................................Professor of Christian Ministries
B.A., Wheaton College; M.Div., Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary; Ph.D., Talbot
School of Theology, Biola University.
Shultz ‘01, Tricia M. (2021) ............................................ Assistant Professor of Accounting
B.S., Grove City College; J.D., South Texas College of Law, Certified Public
Accountant.
Skees, Janet E. (2021) ........................................................... Associate Professor of Nursing
B.S.N., M.S.N., La Roche University; DNP, Waynesburg.
Smith ‘03, Ethan C. (2020) ........................................... Associate Professor of Mathematics
B.S., Grove City College; M.S., Ph.D., Clemson University.
Smith ’88, John D. (2019) ............................................ Associate Professor of Management
B.S., Grove City College; M.S., Carnegie Mellon University; D.B.A., Cleveland State
University.
Smith ’84, Kenneth E. (2010) ....Assistant Director of the Center for Entrepreneurship and
Innovation, and Assistant Professor of Entrepreneurship
B.A., Grove City College; M.A., University of Pittsburgh.

324 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Stanton, Samuel S. (2006) ...................................................... Professor of Political Science
B.A., M.A., Arkansas State University; Ph.D., Texas Tech University.
Stauff ’05, Devin L. (2011) .................................................................. Professor of Biology
B.S., Grove City College; Ph.D., Vanderbilt University.
Stone, J. Nicole ’98, ’99 (2014) ............................ Assessment Coordinator for the Business
Program, Chair of the Department of Accounting and Finance, and
Associate Professor of Accounting
B.S., M.S., Grove City College; Certified Public Accountant.
Sweet ’85, Timothy J. (2005) ........................ Chair of the Department of Entrepreneurship
and Associate Professor of Entrepreneurship
B.A., Grove City College; Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary; M.Div., Pittsburgh
Theological Seminary; University of Pittsburgh.
Tedford ’00, Jeffrey M. (2011) .....................Chair of the Department of Music, Director of
Orchestral Activities, and Professor of Music
B.M., Grove City College; M.M., Carnegie Mellon University; D.M.A., Shenandoah
University.
Thompson, Gary L. (1996) ........................................................... Professor of Mathematics
B.S., Wake Forest University; M.S., M. Ed., University of Illinois;
Ph.D., University of Virginia.
Thrasher ’80, James T. (1984)………… ... Senior Advisor to the Vice President for Student
Recruitment and Guest Lecturer in Exercise Science
B.A., Grove City College; M.A., Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania; Reformed
Presbyterian Theological Seminary; Ed.D., Nova Southeastern University.
Throckmorton, E. Warren (1994) ................................................... Professor of Psychology
B.A., Cedarville College; M.A., Central Michigan University; Ph.D., Ohio University.
Trueman, Carl R. (2018) .................................... Professor of Biblical and Religious Studies
M.A., St. Catharine’s College, University of Cambridge; Ph.D., King’s College,
University of Aberdeen.
Ulrich, Vernon W. (2005) .......................................... Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S., Bridgewater College; M.S., Ph.D., University of Virginia.
Verbois, Caleb, A, (2014) ....................................................... Professor of Political Science
B.A. Oglethorpe University, M.A., Ph.D. University of Virginia.
Wagner, Doris J. “DJ” (2001) ............................................................... Professor of Physics
B.S., College of William and Mary; M.S., Ph.D., Vanderbilt University.
Waha, Kristen B. (2015) ....................................................... Associate Professor of English
B.A., Westmont College; Ph.D., University of California, Davis.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 325

Welton, Gary L. (1991).............................. Assistant Dean for Institutional Assessment and
Professor of Psychology
B.A., Cedarville College; M.A., Slippery Rock University; M.A., Ph.D., State
University of New York at Buffalo.
West, Ryan D. (2016) ......................................................Associate Professor of Philosophy
B.A., Biola University; M.A., Talbot School of Theology; M.A., Ph.D., Baylor
University.
Wolfe, Britton D. (2015)............................... Chair of the Department of Computer Science
and Professor of Computer Science
B.S., Carnegie Mellon University; Ph.D., University of Michigan.
Wolinski, Jeffrey P. (2001) ..................................... Chair of the Department of Physics and
Professor of Physics
B.A., Rutgers University; M.A., Ph.D., Harvard University.
Wong, Venney (2015)....................................................... Associate Professor of Chemistry
B.S., Southern Illinois University; Ph.D., Southern Illinois University.
Wood, Darren M. (2020) ....................................................... Assistant Professor of Biology
... B.S., Mansfield University of Pennsylvania; M.S., Ph.D., West Virginia University.
Yowler, Brian C. (2019) ....................................................... Associate Professor of Biology
B.S., Indiana University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D., Penn State University College of
Medicine.
Zhang, He. (2021) ................................................. Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.S., Chinese University of Mining and Technology at Beijing; Ph.D., University of
Arkansas at Little Rock.
Zhang, Youhui “Owen” (2015)............................................ Associate Professor of Finance
B.E., M. Mgmt., Dalian University of Technology; Ph.D., University of Massachusetts
Amherst.

Adjunct Faculty
Barbour, Kristin A. (2007) ........................................ Adjunct Assistant Professor of Theatre
B.A., Northwestern College; M.A., Kansas University; Ph.D., Kent State University.
Martin, Tammi S. (2011) ........................................ Adjunct Professor of Special Education
B.S., M.A., Slippery Rock University; M.Ed., California University of Pennsylvania.

Additional Instructional Faculty
Agnew, Rochelle L. (2017)..................................... Music Lesson Instructor in Violin/Viola
B.M., M.M., Duquesne University.
Bauer, Christian (2022).................................................... Guest Lecturer in Communication
B.S., Westminster College.

326 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Bellassai, Anthony C. (2014) ................................... Music Lesson Instructor in String Bass
B.S., Towson University.
Berry, Matthew A. (2019).............................................. Guest Lecturer in Political Science
B.A, Baylor University; Ph.D., Boston College
Billock, Rebecca L. (2013) ............................................... Music Lesson Instructor in Piano
B.M., Walla Walla College; M.M., University of Redlands; D.M.A., University of
Washington.
Blaine, Jonathan A. (2009) ............................. Manager, Computer Services & Support and
Guest Lecturer in Business
B.S., Clarion University.
Bodamer ’99, Amy S. (2005).................................................... Guest Lecturer in Education
B.S., Grove City College; M.A. Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania.
Burkholder, Benjamin J. (2021)................ Guest Lecturer in Biblical and Religious Studies
B.S., Cairn University; M. Div., Th. M.,Talbot School of Theology; Ph.D., Duquesne
University.
Cameron ’91, Glenn R. (2013) ....................................... Assistant Marching Band Director
B.M., Grove City College.
Campagnolo, Enzo R. (2022)............................. Guest Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering
B. Sc., Cornell University; C.V.M., Universita’ degli Studi di Perugia; M. P.H.,
University of Illinois.
Carlin ’20, Samuel E. (2021) ....................................... Guest Lecturer in Computer Science
B.S., Grove City College.
Catanese, Alexander J. (2019) ....................................................... Guest Lecturer in Design
B.F.A., M.F.A., Kent State University.
Cotherman ‘06, Charles E. (2022) ............ Guest Lecturer in Biblical and Religious Studies
B.A., Grove City College; M. Div., Pittsburgh Theological Seminary; M.A., Ph. D.,
University of Virginia.
Coyne ’04, John M. (2004) ......................................................... Guest Lecturer in Business
B.A., Grove City College; M.A., Geneva College; Ph.D., Gannon University.
Davidek, Jeffrey R. (2020) .......................................................... Guest Lecturer in Finance
B.A., Allegheny College.
Day ‘00, Leah M. (2022) ................................................. Guest Lecturer in Communication
B.A., Grove City College; M.A, Kent State University.
DiDonato ’04, Andrea D. (2020) ................................................ Guest Lecturer in Business
B.S., Grove City College.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 327

Duca, Stephen V. (2022)...................................................... Guest Lecturer in Management
BSEE., MSEE, Youngstown State University; M.S., Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
English, Kyle P. D. (2017) ............................................ Guest Lecturer in Entrepreneurship
B.A., Bishop’s University.
Fennell, Drew R. (2007) ............................................... Music Lesson Instructor in Trumpet
B.F.A., Carnegie Mellon University.
Fitch, Bradley A. (2017) ............... College Organist and Music Lesson Instructor in Organ
B.M., Oberlin College; M.M., Indiana University; D.M.A., University of Oklahoma.
Fleske II, William A (2020) ...................................................... Guest Lecturer in Sociology
B.A., Slippery Rock University; M.A., Slippery Rock University
Frederick, Sandra L. (2015) ...................................................... Guest Lecturer in Education
B.S., M.Ed., Slippery Rock University.
Garvey, Kevin A. (2014) .............................................................. Guest Lecturer in English
B.A., Point Park University.
Grigsby, Victor J. (2022) ................................................. Guest Lecturer in Communication
B.A., University of Pittsburgh; M.A, Pittsburgh Theological Seminary; Ph.D.,
Duquesne University.
Hammond, Ryan M. (2017) ....... Guest Lecturer in Communication Studies and Visual Arts
B.A., Grove City College; M.F.A., Kent State University.
Hansford, Jason L. (2022)................................................ Guest Lecturer in Communication
B.S., United States Military Academy; M.A., University of Texas, M., Rel Ed., M.
Div., Liberty University.
Heasley, Daniel G. (2011) ........................................ Music Lesson Instructor in Saxophone
B.M., Youngstown State University.
Heid, Ronald J. (2003) .... ……….Guest Lecturer in Music, Marching Band Staff Assistant,
and Music Lesson Instructor in Percussion
B.S., M.S., Duquesne University.
Jackson, Tracy O. (2020) ................................................................Guest Lecture in Writing
B.A., M.A., Purdue University.
Karen, Jana M. (2022) ......................... Guest Lecturer in Music, Lesson Instructor in Oboe
B.Mu. in Music Education, Clarion University of Pennsylvania.
Kohanski, Elisa C. (2005) .................................................. Music Lesson Instructor in Cello
B.M., Eastman School of Music; M.M., Carnegie Mellon University.
Kubik, Paula A. (2005) .......................................... Music Lesson Instructor in Piano/Organ
B.M., Youngstown University; M.M., Colorado State University.

328 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Lewis, Cedric E. (2013) .......................... Guest Lecturer of Entrepreneurship and Business
B.B.A., Stetson University; M.B.A., J.D., Nova Southeastern University.
Loconte, Joseph (2022) ........................ Visiting Professor in Biblical and Religious Studies
and Research Fellow for Institute of Faith and Freedom
M.S., University of Illinois; M.A., Wheaton College; Ph.D., University of London.
May, Douglas L. (1996)........................................... Assistant Marching Band Director and
Music Lesson Instructor in Trombone
B.S., Clarion University of Pennsylvania; M.Mus., Eastern New Mexico University.
Miller ’99, Ryan E. (2020)........................... Guest Lecturer in Management and Marketing
B.S., Grove City College; M.B.A., Robert Morris University; Ph.D., Indiana University
of Pennsylvania.
Montgomery ‘96, Brian C. (2021) ..................... Guest Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering
B.S.M.E., Grove City College.
Mourachian, Mark J. (2022) ..................... Guest Lecturer in Biblical and Religious Studies
B.A., M.A., Ph.D., The Catholic University
Natali Jr., Eugene M. (2020)........................................................ Guest Lecturer in Finance
B.A., Allegheny College; M.B.A., Carnegie Mellon University.
Nemeth, Daniel J. (2020) .......................................................... Guest Lecturer in Education
B.A., M.A, University of Pittsburgh
Newman, Patrick T. (2022).................................................... Visiting Fellow in Economics
B.A., Rutgers University; Ph.D., George Mason University.
Omasits ’05, Christopher J. (2016) ........................................... Guest Lecturer in Education
B.S., Grove City College; M.Ed., Gannon University.
Patterson, Richard D. (2020) ......................................... Guest Lecturer in Exercise Science
B.S., Alfred University; M.S., Hofstra University; D.A.T., University of Idaho.
Philson, Cynthia L. (2014) ............................................................ Guest Lecturer in English
B.A., Grove City College; M.Ed., Slippery Rock University.
Piastro-Tedford, Sasha E. (2011) ..............................................Guest Lecturer in Music and
Music Lesson Instructor in Voice
B.F.A., Carnegie Mellon University; M.M., Penn State University; D.M.A.,
Shenandoah Conservatory.
Potter, Sarah C. (2012) ............................................................. Guest Lecturer in Education
B.A., Wheaton College; M.A., University of Virginia.
Ruby, Ashton T. (2022) ................................................... Guest Lecturer in Communication
B.S., Slippery Rock University; M.F.A., Full Sail University.

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 329

Rupnik, Elizabeth J. (2019) ...................................................... Guest Lecturer in Education
B.S., M.Ed., Slippery Rock University.
Sanders, Glen E. (2014) .................................. Guest Lecturer in Visual Arts and Education
B.F.A., Edinboro University.
Scanga, James V. Jr. (1996) ................................... Music Lesson Instructor in French Horn
B.S., Indiana University of Pennsylvania; M.Mus., Youngstown State University.
Scott, Julia A. (2006) ......................................................... Music Lesson Instructor in Harp
B.F.A., M.A., Ohio University; M.M., Indiana University; Artist Diploma in
Performance, Pappert School of Music, Duquesne University.
Senita, Karyn E. (2019) ............................................................ Guest Lecturer in Education
B.S., Thiel College; M.S., University of Norther Iowa Angers, France.
Sheffer ‘13, Robert B. (2022) ......................................... Music Lesson Instructor in Guitar
B.M. Grove City College; M.M. Houghton College.
Shields, Kelly J. (2022)................................................ Guest Lecturer in Computer Science
B.S., Grove City College; M.S., University of Pittsburgh; M.S., Ph.D., Virginia
Commonwealth University.
Snyder, David O. (2010) ........................................................... Guest Lecturer in Education
B.S., Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; M.S. Old Dominion University.
Strain, Joy G. (2012). .................................................................... Guest Lecturer in Biology
B.S., University of Tennessee at Martin; M.S., Memphis State University.
Tessmer, David P. (1996) .................................................. Music Lesson Instructor in Flute
B.A., Houston Baptist University; M.Mus., Duquesne University.
Vassar-Bush, Vannessa G. (2022) ......................................... Guest Lecturer in Social Work
B. SW., Shepherd College; M. SW., West Virginia University; DHCE, Duquesne
University.
Venesky, Jason P. (2022).................................................. Music Lesson Instructor in Tuba
B.F.A, Carnegie Mellon University
Wise, Scott A. (2019) .................................................... Guest Lecturer in Exercise Science
B.S., D.P.T., Slippery Rock University.
Young, M. Susan (2000) ......................................................... Guest Lecturer in Music and
Music Lesson Instructor in Voice/Opera
B.M., University of Houston; M.Mus., Duquesne University.

Retired Administration
Bowne, Anne Parr (1980-1999) Director of Financial Aid
Champion, Harold S. (1993-1999) Director of Physical Plant
DeVelde, Everett C. Jr. (1980-2000) Director of Technical Services and Assistant
Professor of Computer Science

330 / DIRECTORIES (2022-2023)

Grundy ’65, Diane H. (1969-2013) Director of Library Services and Assistant Professor
of English
Jewell ’67, Richard G. (2003-2015) President Emeritus and Professor of Business Law
and Public Policy
Keehlwetter, F. Stanley (1999-2018) Dean of the Chapel and Guest Lecturer in Humanities
Moore, John H. (1996-2003) President Emeritus and Professor of Economics
Morledge ’54, Richard A. (1984-1999) Dean of the Chapel
Smith ’59, Robert W. (1970-2001) Registrar
Sparks ’66, John A. (1976-2013) Dean for the Alva J. Calderwood School of Arts and
Letters and Professor of Business
Towle ’68, Roger K. (1995-2016) Vice President for Financial Affairs

Retired Faculty
Allgaier, Darrell E. (2003-2011) Professor of Mathematics
Allison, Blair T. (1999-2021) Professor of Mechanical Engineering
Anderson, William P., Jr. (1987-2020) Professor of Sociology
Archibald, C. Mark (1996-2021) Professor of Mechanical Engineering
Arnold, Edwin P. (1975-2013) Chair of the Department of Music and Fine Arts Director
of the Pew Fine Arts Center and Professor of Music
Barr, John F. (1972-1998) Assistant Professor of Physical Education
Bowne, Dale R. (1963-1999) Samuel P. Harbison Professor of Religion
Brenner, Frederic J. (1969-2020) Professor of Biology
Brown, Janice B. (1994- 2015) Professor of English
Browne, Douglas A. (1981-2014) Professor of Music
Burckle, Jay C. (1961-1999) Professor of Physics
Bussel, William D. (1992-2000) Professor of Education
Calaboyias, Peter J. (1995-2014) Adjunct Professor of Art and Artist in Residence
Carlson ’62, Ralph E. (2000-2014) Professor of Mathematics
Cole, J. Harvey (1962- 2015) Adjunct Full Professor of German and English
Dixon, Diane M. (1997-2015) Professor of English and Communication Studies
Dixon, James G. III (1976-2015) Professor of English
Dupree, James V. (1990-2014) Professor of Business and Entrepreneurship
Ellison, John H. (1970-2008) Professor of Mathematics
Fabian ’52, Michael W. (1964-1993) Professor of Biology
Fleming, Larry D. (1974-2007) Professor of Accounting
Folkertsma, Marvin J., Jr. (1974-2014) Chair of the Department of Political Science and
Professor of Political Science
Foster, Ross A. (1969-2000) Professor of Humanities and Philosophy
Genareo, Phyllis P. (1995-2021) Director of Special Education and Professor of Education
Hamilton, Lois J. (1968-1994) Assistant Professor of Art
Helfinstine, Robert A. (1987-2006) Professor of Mechanical Engineering
Hendrickson, Mark W. (2004-2019) Adjunct Professor of Economics and
Entrepreneurship
Henry, Marvin C. (1962-2003) Professor of Mathematics
Henry, Patricia Zbell (1964-1993) Assistant Professor of Physical Education
Hinton, William M. (1991-2015) Professor of Business
Howley, George B. (2008-2019) Assistant Professor of Entrepreneurship
Jenny, Frederick J. (1984-2014) Professor of Computer Science and Educational
Technology and Director of Instructional Technology
Johnson, Lois L. (1995-2020) Director of the Office of International Education and
Professor of Education

DIRECTORIES (2022-2023) / 331

Jones, David H. (1990-2008) Professor of Biochemistry
Ketler ’71, Bruce W. (1977-2018) Professor of Business
Konzen, Richard A. (1992-2017) Facilities Director, Pew Fine Arts Center; Professor of
Music; and College Organist
Leo, Richard A. (1967-2004) Professor of Physics
Léon, Celine T. (1970-2017) Adjunct Professor of French
Lillie, W. Thomas (1983-1996) Associate Professor of Political Science
Lyle, Donald L. (1972-2015) Chair of the Department of Physical Education and Athletics,
Athletic Director, and Professor of Physical Education
Mech, Timothy S. (1998-2017) Professor of Business/Finance and Entrepreneurship
Mitchell-Emigh, L. Kay (1986-2017) Head Athletic Trainer and Assistant Professor of
Exercise Science
Naegele, Sara K. (1966-1990) Assistant Professor of Chemistry
Otto, John F. (1973-2010) Associate Professor of Business
Patterson ’73, Carolyn M. (1998-2017) Assistant Director of the Grove City College Early
Education Center and Instructor in Education
Ray, Durwood B. (1994-2011) Professor of Biology
Reuber, Mark O. (1989-2020) Field Director for the Office of International Education and
Professor of Mechanical Engineering
Rhoades, Kathy J. (2002-2021) Associate Professor of Visual Arts
Rice, Alan W. (1979-1999) Professor of Mechanical Engineering
Roberts, Susan K. (1985-2014) Associate Director of Athletics for Women and Professor
of Physical Education
Scheffler, Patricia S. (2006-2020) Professor of Education
Seybold, Kevin S. (1985-2021) Chair of the Department of Psychology and Social Work
and Professor of Psychology
Smith ’72, Christopher W. (1979-2016) Athletic Director and Associate Professor of
Exercise Science
Smith ’72, Gary S. (1978-2017) Chair of the Department of History, Professor of History,
and Coordinator of the Humanities Core
Snyder, Richard W. (2016-2021) Assistant Professor of Accounting
Sodergren, Arnold W. (1973-2011) Professor of Biology
Stansberry, Gloria J. (1966-2006) Professor of English
Stephens, Barbara C. (1977-2006) Associate Professor of Education
Stephens, John H. (1994-2021) Adjunct Professor of Education
Stringer, Randy C. (1993-2017) Professor of Biblical and Religious Studies
Su, Shuhui (2009-2020) Professor of Modern Languages
Tilford, Earl H. (2001-2008) Professor of History
Tinkey ‘75, Patricia A. (2004-2020) Professor of Spanish
Trammell, Catherine M. (1981-2011) Professor of Modern Languages
Trammell, Richard L. (1971-2014) Professor of Philosophy
Valentine, David W. (2018-2021) Professor of Computer Science
Van Til, L. John (1972-2004) Professor of Humanities and Business
Voltz, Ramon J. (1971-2007) Professor of Mathematics
Walters, Joseph D. (1972-2012) Associate Director of Athletics for Men and Professor of
Physical Education
Wentworth, Theodore O., Jr. (1996-2018) Professor of Spanish
Yeager, Dorian P. (1995-2015) Professor of Computer Science and Mathematics
Yeager, M. Carol (1995-2015) Adjunct Professor of Biology

